
===== PAGE 1 =====
Special educational
needs and disability
code of practice:
0 to 25 years
Statutory guidance for organisations
which work with and support children
and young people who have special
educational needs or disabilities
January 2015

===== PAGE 2 =====
Contents
Foreword 11
Introduction 12
About this guidance 12
Expiry or review date 12
To which legislation does this guidance refer? 12
Who must have regard to this guidance? 13
The First-tier Tribunal (Special Educational Needs and Disability) 13
Changes from the SEN Code of Practice (2001) 13
Implementation of the Code of Practice 14
Special educational needs (SEN) 15
Disabled children and young people 16
Related legislation and guidance 18
1 Principles 19
What this chapter covers 19
Relevant legislation 19
Principles underpinning this Code of Practice 19
The principles in practice 20
Participating in decision making 20
Supporting children, young people and parents to participate in decisions
about their support 21
Involving children, young people and parents in planning, commissioning and
reviewing services 22
Parent Carer Forums 22
Identifying children and young people’s needs 23
Greater choice and control for parents and young people over their support 24
Collaboration between education, health and social care services to provide
support 24
High quality provision to meet the needs of children and young people
with SEN 25
A focus on inclusive practice and removing barriers to learning 25
Supporting successful preparation for adulthood 28
2 Impartial information, advice and support 30
What this chapter covers 30
Relevant legislation 30
Introduction 30
Who are information, advice and support for? 32
2

===== PAGE 3 =====
Children 32
Parents 32
Young people 32
What needs to be provided? 33
Additional support 35
Support for parents in HM Armed Forces 36
3 Working together across education, health and care for joint
outcomes 37
What this chapter covers 37
Relevant legislation 38
The legal framework 38
Scope of joint commissioning arrangements 39
Establishing effective partnerships across education, health and care 41
Partnership with children, young people and parents 42
Joint understanding: Joint Strategic Needs Assessments 43
Responsibility for decision-making in joint commissioning arrangements 44
Using information to understand and predict need for services 45
Joint planning 46
Deciding on shared outcomes 46
Making best use of resources 47
Personal Budgets 48
Joint delivery 49
Joint review to improve service offered 49
Education, Health and Care: roles and responsibilities 50
Designated Medical/Clinical Officer 50
Children’s social care 51
Adult social care 52
Health services for children and young people with SEN and disabilities and
their families 53
Local authorities’ role in delivering health services 54
The health commissioning duty 55
Schools and post-16 settings as commissioners 55
Regional commissioning: meeting the needs of children and young people with
highly specialised and/or low-incidence needs 55
Local accountability 56
4 The Local Offer 59
What this chapter covers 59
Relevant legislation 59
3

===== PAGE 4 =====
What is the Local Offer? 59
Preparing and reviewing the Local Offer 61
Involving children and young people and parents 61
Involving schools, colleges, health services and others 63
Keeping the Local Offer under review 64
Publishing comments about the Local Offer 65
Taking action in response to comments about the Local Offer 66
What must be included in the Local Offer? 66
Educational, health and care provision 68
Training and apprenticeships 73
Transport 73
Support available to children and young people to help them prepare for
adulthood 74
Information about how to seek an EHC needs assessment 76
Information, advice and support 77
Publishing the Local Offer 77
5 Early years providers 78
What this chapter covers 78
Relevant legislation 78
Improving outcomes: high aspirations and expectations for children with SEN 79
Equality Act 2010 80
Medical conditions 81
SEN in the early years 81
From birth to two – early identification 81
Early years provision 82
Progress check at age two 83
Assessment at the end of the EYFS – the EYFS profile 84
Identifying needs in the early years 84
SEN support in the early years 86
Assess 86
Plan 86
Do 87
Review 87
Transition 88
Involving specialists 88
Requesting an Education, Health and Care needs assessment 88
Record keeping 88
Keeping provision under review 88
The role of the SENCO in early years provision 88
4

===== PAGE 5 =====
The role of the Area SENCO 89
Funding for SEN support in the early years 90
6 Schools 91
What this chapter covers 91
Relevant legislation 91
Improving outcomes: high aspirations and expectations for children and young
people with SEN 92
Equality and inclusion 93
Medical conditions 94
Curriculum 94
Careers guidance for children and young people 94
Identifying SEN in schools 94
Broad areas of need 97
Special educational provision in schools 99
SEN support in schools 100
Transition 102
Involving specialists 102
Requesting an Education, Health and Care needs assessment 103
Involving parents and pupils in planning and reviewing progress 104
Use of data and record keeping 105
Publishing information: SEN information report 106
The role of the SENCO in schools 108
Funding for SEN support 109
7 Further education 111
What this chapter covers 111
Relevant legislation 111
Introduction 111
Statutory duties on post-16 institutions 112
Equality Act 2010 113
Careers guidance for young people 114
Identifying SEN 114
SEN support in college 114
Assessing what support is needed 115
Planning the right support 115
Putting the provision in place 116
Keeping support under review 116
Expertise within and beyond the college 116
Record keeping 117
5

===== PAGE 6 =====
Funding for SEN support 118
8 Preparing for adulthood from the earliest years 120
What this chapter covers 120
Relevant legislation 121
Introduction 122
Strategic planning for the best outcomes in adult life 122
Duties on local authorities 123
Starting early 124
Support from Year 9 onwards (age 13-14) 124
Children and young people with EHC plans: preparing for adulthood reviews 125
Young people preparing to make their own decisions 126
16- to 17-year-olds 127
Support for young people 128
The Mental Capacity Act 128
Planning the transition into post-16 education and training 128
Careers advice for children and young people 130
High quality study programmes for students with SEN 130
Pathways to employment 131
Packages of support across five days a week 132
Transition to higher education 133
Young people aged 19 to 25 135
Funding places for 19- to 25-year-olds 135
Transition to adult health services 136
Transition to adult social care 136
Transition assessments for young people with EHC plans 137
Continuity of provision 138
EHC plans and statutory care and support plans 138
Personal Budgets 139
Leaving education or training 140
9 Education, Health and Care needs assessments and plans 141
What the chapter covers 141
Relevant legislation 141
Introduction 142
Requesting an EHC needs assessment 143
Considering whether an EHC needs assessment is necessary 144
Principles underpinning co-ordinated assessment and planning 147
Involving children, young people and parents in decision-making 147
Support for children, young people and parents 149
6

===== PAGE 7 =====
Co-ordination 149
Sharing information 150
Timely provision of services 150
Cross-agency working 151
Looked after children 151
Timescales for EHC needs assessment and preparation of an EHC plan 151
Advice and information for EHC needs assessments 155
Deciding whether to issue an EHC plan 157
Decision not to issue an EHC plan 159
Transparent and consistent decision-making 159
Writing the EHC plan 160
Content of EHC plans 161
Outcomes 162
What to include in each section of the EHC plan 164
Agreeing the health provision in EHC plans 170
Responsibility for provision 170
The draft EHC plan 171
Requests for a particular school, college or other institution 172
Where no request is made for a particular school or college or a request for a
particular school or college has not been met 174
Reasonable steps 175
Requesting a Personal Budget 178
Mechanisms for delivery of a Personal Budget 179
Setting and agreeing the Personal Budget 179
Scope of Personal Budgets 181
Use of direct payments 183
Finalising and maintaining the EHC plan 185
Maintaining special educational provision in EHC plans 186
Maintaining social care provision in EHC plans 187
Maintaining health provision in EHC plans 188
Specific age ranges 188
All children under compulsory school age 188
Children aged under 2 188
Children aged 2 to 5 189
Young people aged 19 to 25 190
Transfer of EHC plans 192
Transfers between local authorities 192
Transfers between clinical commissioning groups 193
Reviewing an EHC plan 194
7

===== PAGE 8 =====
Reviews where a child or young person attends a school or other institution 195
Reviews where a child or young person does not attend a school or other
institution 197
Reviews of EHC plans for children aged 0 to 5 198
Transfer between phases of education 198
Preparing for adulthood in reviews 199
Re-assessments of EHC plans 200
Requesting a re-assessment 200
The re-assessment process 201
Amending an existing plan 201
Ceasing an EHC plan 202
Disclosure of an EHC plan 205
Transport costs for children and young people with EHC plans 206
10 Children and young people in specific circumstances 208
What this chapter covers 208
Relevant legislation 208
Looked-after children 209
Care leavers 211
SEN and social care needs, including children in need 211
Children’s social care 211
Power to continue children’s social care services to those aged 18 to 25 213
Children and young people educated out of area 214
Children and young people with SEN educated at home 214
Children with SEN who are in alternative provision 216
Children and young people in alternative provision because of health needs 218
Children of Service personnel 219
Action to take in respect of Service children with SEN 219
First-tier Tribunal (SEN and Disability) 221
Further information 221
Children and young people with SEN who are in youth custody 222
Relevant legislation 222
What this section covers 222
Introduction 223
Summary of statutory requirements 223
Sharing information 225
Education for children and young people in youth custody 225
Healthcare for children and young people in youth custody 226
Requesting an EHC needs assessment for a detained person 227
8

===== PAGE 9 =====
Considering whether an assessment of post-detention education, health
and care needs is necessary 227
Advice and information for an assessment of post-detention education,
health and care needs 229
Preparing an EHC plan for a detained person in custody 233
Provision of information, advice and support 234
Partial assessment on entry to or exit from custody 235
Transfer between places of relevant youth accommodation 236
Appeals and mediation 236
Keeping an EHC plan and arranging special educational provision 237
Arranging health care provision for detained children and young peopl
with EHC plans 239
Monitoring provision in custody 240
Review on release from youth custody 240
Moving to a new local authority on release 241
Looked after children remanded or sentenced to custody 241
Transition from youth justice to a custodial establishment for adults 242
Education on release for those in a custodial establishment for adults 242
Cross-border detention 243
11 Resolving disagreements 244
What this chapter covers 244
Relevant legislation 244
Principles for resolving disagreements 245
Early resolution of disagreements 248
Disagreement resolution arrangements and mediation 248
Disagreement resolution services 248
Contracting disagreement resolution services 250
Mediation 251
Contracting services for mediation and mediation information 252
Routes to mediation 252
Mediation on matters which can be appealed to the Tribunal 252
Mediation advice before mediation 253
Exceptions to the requirement to contact a mediation adviser 254
Going to mediation about matters which can be appealed to the Tribunal 254
Mediation on the health and social care elements of an EHC plan 255
Effective mediation 257
Children and young people in youth custody 258
Registering an appeal with the Tribunal 258
9

===== PAGE 10 =====
Parents’ and young people’s right to appeal to the Tribunal about EHC needs
assessments and EHC plans 258
The First-tier Tribunal (SEN and Disability) 258
The role and function of the Tribunal 259
Who can appeal to the Tribunal about EHC needs assessments and plans 259
What parents and young people can appeal about 259
Conditions related to appeals 260
Decisions the Tribunal can make 260
How parents and young people can appeal 261
Disability discrimination claims 262
Exclusion 262
Legal aid 264
Complaints procedures 265
Early education providers’ and schools’ complaints procedures 265
Complaints to the Secretary of State 266
Complaints to Ofsted 266
Post-16 institution complaints 267
Local Authority complaints procedures 268
Local Government Ombudsman 268
The Parliamentary and Health Service Ombudsman 269
Judicial review 270
NHS Complaints 270
Complaints about social services provision 271
Annex 1: Mental Capacity 273
Annex 2: Improving practice and staff training in education
settings 276
Glossary of terms 278
References 287
10

===== PAGE 11 =====
Foreword
From the Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for Health
and the Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for
Children and Families
Our vision for children with special educational needs and disabilities is the same as
for all children and young people – that they achieve well in their early years, at
school and in college, and lead happy and fulfilled lives.
This new Special Educational Needs and Disability Code of Practice will play a vital
role in underpinning the major reform programme.
For children and young people this means that their experiences will be of a system
which is less confrontational and more efficient. Their special educational needs and
disabilities will be picked up at the earliest point with support routinely put in place
quickly, and their parents will know what services they can reasonably expect to be
provided. Children and young people and their parents or carers will be fully involved
in decisions about their support and what they want to achieve. Importantly, the
aspirations for children and young people will be raised through an increased focus
on life outcomes, including employment and greater independence.
Local authorities and their local health partners have been working together to
prepare for the new arrangements, to jointly plan and commission services for
children and young people who have special educational needs or are disabled.
Those with more complex needs will have an integrated assessment and where
appropriate a single Education, Health and Care plan for their support.
The Code of Practice is the product of extensive consultation, and draws on the
experience of pathfinder local authorities which have been piloting new approaches
with local communities. We have listened to a wide range of individuals and groups
and the result is a Code which will help everyone working with children and young
people with special educational needs and disability to secure for them the outcomes
from education, health and social care which will make the biggest difference to their
lives.
DR DAN POULTER EDWARD TIMPSON
Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State
for Health for Children and Families
11

===== PAGE 12 =====
Introduction
About this guidance
i. This Code of Practice provides statutory guidance on duties, policies and procedures
relating to Part 3 of the Children and Families Act 2014 and associated regulations
and applies to England. It relates to children and young people with special
educational needs (SEN) and disabled children and young people. A ‘young person’
in this context is a person over compulsory school age and under 25. Compulsory
school age ends on the last Friday of June in the academic year in which they
become 16. For ease of reference, young people are referred to in this Code of
Practice as ‘over 16’.
In this Code of Practice, where the text uses the word ‘must’ it refers to a statutory
requirement under primary legislation, regulations or case law.
The bodies listed in paragraph iv. must have regard to the Code of Practice. This
means that whenever they are taking decisions they must give consideration to what
the Code says. They cannot ignore it. They must fulfil their statutory duties towards
children and young people with SEN or disabilities in the light of the guidance set out
in it. They must be able to demonstrate in their arrangements for children and young
people with SEN or disabilities that they are fulfilling their statutory duty to have
regard to the Code. So, where the text uses the word ‘should’ it means that the
guidance contained in this Code must be considered and that those who must have
regard to it will be expected to explain any departure from it.
Expiry or review date
ii. This guidance will be kept under review and updated when necessary.
To which legislation does this guidance refer?
iii. This guidance refers to Part 3 of the Children and Families Act 2014 and associated
regulations. The regulations associated with the Children and Families Act 2014 are:
• The Special Educational Needs and Disability Regulations 2014
• The Special Educational Needs (Personal Budgets) Regulations 2014
• The Special Educational Needs and Disability (Detained Persons)
Regulations 2015
• The Children and Families Act 2014 (Transitional and Saving Provisions)(No
2) Order 2014
12

===== PAGE 13 =====
Who must have regard to this guidance?
iv. This Code of Practice is statutory guidance for the following organisations:
• local authorities (education, social care and relevant housing and employment
and other services)
• the governing bodies of schools, including non-maintained special schools
• the governing bodies of further education colleges and sixth form colleges
• the proprietors of academies (including free schools, university technical
colleges and studio schools)
• the management committees of pupil referral units
• independent schools and independent specialist providers approved under
Section 41 of the Children and Families Act 2014
• all early years providers in the maintained, private, voluntary and independent
sectors that are funded by the local authority
• the National Health Service Commissioning Board
• clinical commissioning groups (CCGs)
• NHS Trusts
• NHS Foundation Trusts
• Local Health Boards
• Youth Offending Teams and relevant youth custodial establishments
• The First-tier Tribunal (Special Educational Needs and Disability) (see v.)
The First-tier Tribunal (Special Educational Needs and
Disability)
v. When considering an appeal from a parent or young person the First-tier Tribunal
(Special Educational Needs and Disability) (‘the Tribunal’) must have regard to this
Code of Practice. The Tribunal will expect local authorities, early education settings,
schools and colleges to be able to explain any departure from the Code, where it is
relevant to the case it is considering.
Changes from the SEN Code of Practice (2001)
vi. The main changes from the SEN Code of Practice (2001) reflect the changes
introduced by the Children and Families Act 2014. These are:
13

===== PAGE 14 =====
• The Code of Practice (2014) covers the 0-25 age range and includes
guidance relating to disabled children and young people as well as those with
SEN
• There is a clearer focus on the participation of children and young people and
parents in decision-making at individual and strategic levels
• There is a stronger focus on high aspirations and on improving outcomes for
children and young people
• It includes guidance on the joint planning and commissioning of services to
ensure close co-operation between education, health and social care
• It includes guidance on publishing a Local Offer of support for children and
young people with SEN or disabilities
• There is new guidance for education and training settings on taking a
graduated approach to identifying and supporting pupils and students with
SEN (to replace School Action and School Action Plus)
• For children and young people with more complex needs a co-ordinated
assessment process and the new 0-25 Education, Health and Care plan (EHC
plan) replace statements and Learning Difficulty Assessments (LDAs)
• There is a greater focus on support that enables those with SEN to succeed in
their education and make a successful transition to adulthood
• Information is provided on relevant duties under the Equality Act 2010
• Information is provided on relevant provisions of the Mental Capacity Act 2005
• There is new guidance on supporting children and young people with SEN
who are in youth custody.
Implementation of the Code of Practice
Implementation
vii. From 1 September 2014 the majority of Part 3 of the Children and Families Act 2014,
its associated regulations and this Code of Practice will be in force, subject to any
transitional arrangements.
viii. From 1 September 2014 all the organisations listed in paragraph iv. must have
regard to this Code of Practice.
14

===== PAGE 15 =====
ix. Subject to any transitional arrangements made, from that date the following guidance
will cease to have effect:
• SEN Code of Practice (2001)
• Inclusive Schooling (2001)
• Section 139A Learning Difficulty Assessments Statutory Guidance (2013)
Transitional arrangements
x. From 1 September 2014 transitional arrangements will be in place to support the
changeover from the current system to the new system in a phased and ordered
way. These arrangements, which are set out in a statutory transitional order and
accompanied by transitional guidance, will facilitate the transfer of those with
statements to EHC plans. They ensure that during the transition period local
authorities must continue to comply with elements of the Education Act 1996 in
relation to children with statements, and the Learning and Skills Act 2000 in relation
to young people who have had Learning Difficulty Assessments and remain in
education or training (provided they still have learning difficulties).
xi. The legal test of when a child or young person requires an EHC plan remains the
same as that for a statement under the Education Act 1996. Therefore, it is expected
that all those who have a statement and who would have continued to have one
under the current system, will be transferred to an EHC plan – no-one should lose
their statement and not have it replaced with an EHC plan simply because the
system is changing. Similarly, local authorities have undertaken LDAs for young
people either because they had a statement at school or because, in the opinion of
the local authority, they are likely to need additional support as part of their further
education or training and would benefit from an LDA to identify their learning needs
and the provision required to meet those needs. Therefore, the expectation is that
young people who are currently receiving support as a result of an LDA and remain
in further education or training during the transition period, who request and need an
EHC plan, will be issued with one.
xii. Guidance on the provisions in the Children and Families Act 2014 relating to those in
youth custody, which came into force in April 2015, is set out in Chapter 10.
Special educational needs (SEN)
xiii. A child or young person has SEN if they have a learning difficulty or disability which
calls for special educational provision to be made for him or her.
xiv. A child of compulsory school age or a young person has a learning difficulty or
disability if he or she:
15

===== PAGE 16 =====
• has a significantly greater difficulty in learning than the majority of others of
the same age, or
• has a disability which prevents or hinders him or her from making use of
facilities of a kind generally provided for others of the same age in
mainstream schools or mainstream post-16 institutions
xv. For children aged two or more, special educational provision is educational or
training provision that is additional to or different from that made generally for other
children or young people of the same age by mainstream schools, maintained
nursery schools, mainstream post-16 institutions or by relevant early years providers.
For a child under two years of age, special educational provision means educational
provision of any kind.
xvi. A child under compulsory school age has special educational needs if he or she is
likely to fall within the definition in paragraph xiv. above when they reach compulsory
school age or would do so if special educational provision was not made for them
(Section 20 Children and Families Act 2014).
xvii. Post-16 institutions often use the term learning difficulties and disabilities (LDD). The
term SEN is used in this Code across the 0-25 age range but includes LDD.
Disabled children and young people
xviii. Many children and young people who have SEN may have a disability under the
Equality Act 2010 – that is ‘…a physical or mental impairment which has a long-term
and substantial adverse effect on their ability to carry out normal day-to-day
activities’. This definition provides a relatively low threshold and includes more
children than many realise: ‘long-term’ is defined as ‘a year or more’ and ‘substantial’
is defined as ‘more than minor or trivial’. This definition includes sensory impairments
such as those affecting sight or hearing, and long-term health conditions such as
asthma, diabetes, epilepsy, and cancer. Children and young people with such
conditions do not necessarily have SEN, but there is a significant overlap between
disabled children and young people and those with SEN. Where a disabled child or
young person requires special educational provision they will also be covered by the
SEN definition.
xix. The Equality Act 2010 sets out the legal obligations that schools, early years
providers, post-16 institutions, local authorities and others have towards disabled
children and young people:
• They must not directly or indirectly discriminate against, harass or victimise
disabled children and young people
16

===== PAGE 17 =====
• They must not discriminate for a reason arising in consequence of a child or
young person’s disability
• They must make reasonable adjustments, including the provision of auxiliary
aids and services, to ensure that disabled children and young people are not
at a substantial disadvantage compared with their peers. This duty is
anticipatory – it requires thought to be given in advance to what disabled
children and young people might require and what adjustments might need to
be made to prevent that disadvantage
• Public bodies, including further education institutions, local authorities,
maintained schools, maintained nursery schools, academies and free schools
are covered by the public sector equality duty and, when carrying out their
functions, must have regard to the need to eliminate discrimination, promote
equality of opportunity and foster good relations between disabled and non-
disabled children and young people. Public bodies also have specific duties
under the public sector equality duty and must publish information to
demonstrate their compliance with this general duty and must prepare and
publish objectives to achieve the core aims of the general duty. Objectives
must be specific and measurable. The general duty also applies to bodies
that are not public bodies but that carry out public functions. Such bodies
include providers of relevant early years education, non-maintained special
schools, independent specialist providers and others making provision that is
funded from the public purse.
xx. The duties cover discrimination in the provision of services and the provision of
education, including admissions and exclusions. All providers must make
reasonable adjustments to procedures, criteria and practices and by the provision of
auxiliary aids and services. Most providers must also make reasonable adjustments
by making physical alterations. Schools and local authority education functions are
not covered by this last duty, but they must publish accessibility plans (and local
authorities, accessibility strategies) setting out how they plan to increase access for
disabled pupils to the curriculum, the physical environment and to information.
xxi. School governing bodies and proprietors must also publish information about the
arrangements for the admission of disabled children, the steps taken to prevent
disabled children being treated less favourably than others, the facilities provided to
assist access of disabled children, and their accessibility plans.
xxii. Where a child or young person is covered by SEN and disability legislation,
reasonable adjustments and access arrangements should be considered as part of
SEN planning and review. Where school governors are publishing information about
17

===== PAGE 18 =====
their arrangements for disabled children and young people, this should be brought
together with the information required under the Children and Families Act 2014.
xxiii. Here, and throughout this Code the term ‘parent’ includes all those with parental
responsibility, including parents and those who care for the child.
Related legislation and guidance
xxiv. Where appropriate, references are made in this Code to other relevant legislation.
The Code does not give guidance in relation to that legislation but signals where it
can be found in the References section at the end of this Code.
xxv. Organisations may find it helpful to consider the following related guidance:
• Working Together to Safeguard Children (2013): Statutory guidance from
the Department for Education which sets out what is expected of
organisations and individuals to safeguard and promote the welfare of
children
• The Children Act 1989 Guidance and Regulations Volume 2 (Care
Planning Placement and Case Review) and Volume 3 (Planning
Transition to Adulthood for Care Leavers): Guidance setting out the
responsibilities of local authorities towards looked after children and care
leavers
• Equality Act 2010: Advice for schools: Non-statutory advice from the
Department for Education, produced to help schools understand how the
Equality Act affects them and how to fulfil their duties under the Act
• Reasonable adjustments for disabled pupils (2012): Technical guidance
from the Equality and Human Rights Commission
• Supporting pupils at school with medical conditions (2014): statutory
guidance from the Department for Education
• The Mental Capacity Act Code of Practice: Protecting the vulnerable
(2005)
18

===== PAGE 19 =====
1 Principles
What this chapter covers
Section19 of the Children and Families Act 2014 sets out the principles underpinning
the legislation and the guidance in this Code of Practice. This chapter sets out those
principles and how they are reflected in the chapters that follow.
Relevant legislation
Section 19 of the Children and Families Act 2014
Principles underpinning this Code of Practice
1.1 Section 19 of the Children and Families Act 2014 makes clear that local authorities,
in carrying out their functions under the Act in relation to disabled children and young
people and those with special educational needs (SEN), must have regard to:
• the views, wishes and feelings of the child or young person, and the child’s
parents
• the importance of the child or young person, and the child’s parents,
participating as fully as possible in decisions, and being provided with the
information and support necessary to enable participation in those decisions
• the need to support the child or young person, and the child’s parents, in
order to facilitate the development of the child or young person and to help
them achieve the best possible educational and other outcomes, preparing
them effectively for adulthood
1.2 These principles are designed to support:
• the participation of children, their parents and young people in decision-
making
• the early identification of children and young people’s needs and early
intervention to support them
• greater choice and control for young people and parents over support
• collaboration between education, health and social care services to provide
support
• high quality provision to meet the needs of children and young people with
SEN
19

===== PAGE 20 =====
• a focus on inclusive practice and removing barriers to learning
• successful preparation for adulthood, including independent living and
employment
The principles in practice
Participating in decision making
1.3 Local authorities must ensure that children, their parents and young people are
involved in discussions and decisions about their individual support and about local
provision.
1.4 Early years providers, schools and colleges should also take steps to ensure that
young people and parents are actively supported in contributing to needs
assessments, developing and reviewing Education, Health and Care (EHC) plans.
Specifically, local authorities must
• ensure the child’s parents or the young person are fully included in the EHC
needs assessment process from the start, are fully aware of their opportunities
to offer views and information, and are consulted about the content of the plan
(Chapter 9)
• consult children with SEN or disabilities, and their parents and young people
with SEN or disabilities when reviewing local SEN and social care provision
(Chapter 4)
• consult them in developing and reviewing their Local Offer (Chapter 4)
• make arrangements for providing children with SEN or disabilities, and their
parents, and young people with SEN or disabilities with advice and information
about matters relating to SEN and disability (Chapter 2)
1.5 Clinical Commissioning Groups (CCGs), NHS Trusts or NHS Foundation Trusts who
are of the opinion that a child under compulsory school age has or probably has SEN
or a disability must give the child’s parents the opportunity to discuss their opinion
with them before informing the local authority (see paragraph 1.16).
1.6 Children have a right to receive and impart information, to express an opinion and to
have that opinion taken into account in any matters affecting them from the early
years. Their views should be given due weight according to their age, maturity and
capability (Articles 12 and 13 of the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the
Child).
20

===== PAGE 21 =====
1.7 Parents’ views are important during the process of carrying out an EHC needs
assessment and drawing up or reviewing an EHC plan in relation to a child. Local
authorities, early years providers and schools should enable parents to share their
knowledge about their child and give them confidence that their views and
contributions are valued and will be acted upon. At times, parents, teachers and
others may have differing expectations of how a child’s needs are best met.
Sometimes these discussions can be challenging but it is in the child’s best interests
for a positive dialogue between parents, teachers and others to be maintained, to
work through points of difference and establish what action is to be taken.
1.8 The Children and Families Act 2014 gives significant new rights directly to young
people once they reach the end of compulsory school age (the end of the academic
year in which they turn 16). When a young person reaches the end of compulsory
school age, local authorities and other agencies should normally engage directly with
the young person rather than their parent, ensuring that as part of the planning
process they identify the relevant people who should be involved and how to involve
them. Chapter 8 sets out how some decision-making rights transfer from parents to
young people at this stage and how families will continue to play a critical role in
supporting a young person with SEN. Most young people will continue to want, or
need, their parents and other family members to remain involved in discussions and
decisions about their future. Some young people, and possibly some parents, will not
have the mental capacity to make certain decisions or express their views. Provision
is made in the Children and Families Act (Section 80) to deal with this and Annex 1
to this Code provides further details.
Supporting children, young people and parents to participate in
decisions about their support
1.9 Local authorities must ensure that children, young people and parents are provided
with the information, advice and support necessary to enable them to participate in
discussions and decisions about their support. This should include information on
their rights and entitlements in accessible formats and time to prepare for
discussions and meetings. From Year 9 onwards, particularly for those with
Education, Health and Care plans, local authorities, schools, colleges and other
agencies will be involved in the planning for their transition to adult life, the future
and how to prepare for it, including their health, where they will live, their
relationships, control of their finances, how they will participate in the community and
achieve greater independence. Further details are given in Chapter 8. Local
authorities should help children and their families prepare for the change in status
under SEN law that occurs once the child reaches the end of compulsory school
age.
21

===== PAGE 22 =====
1.10 Local authorities should consider whether some young people may require support
in expressing their views, including whether they may need support from an
advocate (who could be a family member or a professional). Local authorities must
not use the views of parents as a proxy for young people’s views. Young people will
have their own perspective and local authorities should have arrangements in place
to engage with them directly.
Involving children, young people and parents in planning,
commissioning and reviewing services
1.11 Local authorities must consult children with SEN or disabilities, their parents, and
young people with SEN or disabilities in reviewing educational and training provision
and social care provision and in preparing and reviewing the Local Offer. It is
important that they participate effectively in decisions about support available to
them in their local area. Chapters 3 and 4 provide guidance on these duties.
1.12 Effective participation should lead to a better fit between families’ needs and the
services provided, higher satisfaction with services, reduced costs (as long-term
benefits emerge) and better value for money. Local authorities should work with
children, young people and parents to establish the aims of their participation, mark
progress and build trust. They should make use of existing organisations and forums
which represent the views of parents – and those which represent the views of
children and young people directly – and where these do not exist, local authorities
should consider establishing them. Effective participation happens when:
• it is recognised, valued, planned and resourced (for example, through
appropriate remuneration and training)
• it is evident at all stages in the planning, delivery and monitoring of services
• there are clearly described roles for children, young people and parents
• there are strong feedback mechanisms to ensure that children, young
people and parents understand the impact their participation is making
Parent Carer Forums
1.13 Parent Carer Forums are representative local groups of parents and carers of
children and young people with disabilities who work alongside local authorities,
education, health and other service providers to ensure the services they plan,
commission, deliver and monitor meet the needs of children and families. Parent
Carer Forums have been established in most local areas and local authorities are
actively encouraged to work with them. More information about Parent Carer Forums
is available from the websites of Contact a Family and the National Network of
22

===== PAGE 23 =====
Parent Carer Forums. Links to them can be found in the References section under
Chapter 1.
Identifying children and young people’s needs
1.14 Local authorities must carry out their functions with a view to identifying all the
children and young people in their area who have or may have SEN or have or may
have a disability (Section 22 of the Children and Families Act 2014).
1.15 Local authorities may gather information on children and young people with SEN or
disabilities in a number of ways. Anyone can bring a child or young person who they
believe has or probably has SEN or a disability to the attention of a local authority
(Section 24 of the Children and Families Act 2014) and parents, early years
providers, schools and colleges have an important role in doing so.
1.16 CCGs, NHS Trusts and NHS Foundation Trusts must inform the appropriate local
authority if they identify a child under compulsory school age as having, or probably
having, SEN or a disability (Section 23 of the Children and Families Act 2014).
1.17 A child’s parents, young people, schools and colleges have specific rights to request
a needs assessment for an EHC plan and children and their parents and young
people should feel able to tell their school or college if they believe they have or may
have SEN. The legal test of when a child or young person requires an EHC plan
remains the same as that for a statement under the Education Act 1996. Therefore, it
is expected that all those who have a statement and who would have continued to
have one under the current system, will be transferred to an EHC plan – no-one
should lose their statement and not have it replaced with an EHC plan simply
because the system is changing. Similarly, local authorities have undertaken LDAs
for young people either because they had a statement at school or because, in the
opinion of the local authority, they are likely to need additional support as part of their
further education or training and would benefit from an LDA to identify their learning
needs and the provision required to meet those needs. Therefore, the expectation is
that young people who are currently receiving support as a result of an LDA and
remain in further education or training during the transition period, who request and
need an EHC plan, will be issued with one.
1.18 Chapters 5, 6 and 7 provide guidance for early years providers, schools and colleges
on identifying children and young people’s SEN and making provision to meet those
needs as early as possible.
1.19 Local authorities, CCGs and other partners must work together in local Health and
Wellbeing Boards to assess the health needs of local people, including those with
SEN or who are disabled. This assessment, the Joint Strategic Needs Assessment,
informs a local Health and Wellbeing Strategy which sets priorities for those who
23

===== PAGE 24 =====
commission services. Local authorities must keep their educational and training
provision and social care provision for children and young people with SEN or
disabilities under review (Section 27 of the Children and Families Act 2014). In
carrying out this duty, the local authority will gather information from early years
providers, schools and post-16 institutions. In most cases, those institutions must, in
turn, co-operate with the local authority. The local authority must publish and keep
under review its Local Offer of provision in consultation with children, their parents
and young people. Guidance on these matters is given in Chapters 3 and 4.
Greater choice and control for parents and young people over their
support
1.20 A local authority’s Local Offer should reflect the services that are available as a
result of strategic assessments of local needs and reviews of local education and
care provision (Section 27 of the Children and Families Act 2014) and of health
provision (Joint Strategic Needs Assessments and Joint Commissioning
arrangements (Section 26 of the Children and Families Act 2014). Linking these
assessments and reviews to the Local Offer will help to identify gaps in local
provision. Local authorities must involve children and young people with SEN or
disabilities and the parents of children with SEN or disabilities in the development
and review of the Local Offer. This will help to ensure it is responsive to local
families. Guidance on the Local Offer is provided in Chapter 4.
1.21 Parents of children who have an EHC plan and young people who have such a plan
have a right to ask for a particular educational institution to be named in the plan and
for a Personal Budget for their support. Guidance is given in Chapter 9.
Collaboration between education, health and social care services to
provide support
1.22 If children and young people with SEN or disabilities are to achieve their ambitions
and the best possible educational and other outcomes, including getting a job and
living as independently as possible, local education, health and social care services
should work together to ensure they get the right support.
1.23 When carrying out their statutory duties under the Children and Families Act 2014,
local authorities must do so with a view to making sure that services work together
where this promotes children and young people’s wellbeing or improves the quality
of special educational provision (Section 25 of the Children and Families Act 2014).
Local authorities must work with one another to assess local needs. Local
authorities and health bodies must have arrangements in place to plan and
commission education, health and social care services jointly for children and young
people with SEN or disabilities (Section 26). Chapter 3 gives guidance on those
duties.
24

===== PAGE 25 =====
High quality provision to meet the needs of children and young
people with SEN
1.24 High quality teaching that is differentiated and personalised will meet the individual
needs of the majority of children and young people. Some children and young people
need educational provision that is additional to or different from this. This is special
educational provision under Section 21 of the Children and Families Act 2014.
Schools and colleges must use their best endeavours to ensure that such provision
is made for those who need it. Special educational provision is underpinned by high
quality teaching and is compromised by anything less.
1.25 Early years providers, schools and colleges should know precisely where children
and young people with SEN are in their learning and development. They should:
• ensure decisions are informed by the insights of parents and those of children
and young people themselves
• have high ambitions and set stretching targets for them
• track their progress towards these goals
• keep under review the additional or different provision that is made for them
• promote positive outcomes in the wider areas of personal and social
development, and
• ensure that the approaches used are based on the best possible evidence
and are having the required impact on progress
Chapters 5, 6 and 7 give guidance on identifying and supporting children and young
people with SEN or disabilities.
A focus on inclusive practice and removing barriers to learning
1.26 As part of its commitments under articles 7 and 24 of the United Nations Convention
of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, the UK Government is committed to
inclusive education of disabled children and young people and the progressive
removal of barriers to learning and participation in mainstream education. The
Children and Families Act 2014 secures the general presumption in law of
mainstream education in relation to decisions about where children and young
people with SEN should be educated and the Equality Act 2010 provides protection
from discrimination for disabled people.
1.27 Where a child or young person has SEN but does not have an EHC plan they must
be educated in a mainstream setting except in specific circumstances (see below).
25

===== PAGE 26 =====
The School Admissions Code of Practice requires children and young people with
SEN to be treated fairly. Admissions authorities:
• must consider applications from parents of children who have SEN but do not
have an EHC plan on the basis of the school’s published admissions criteria
as part of normal admissions procedures
• must not refuse to admit a child who has SEN but does not have an EHC
plan because they do not feel able to cater for those needs
• must not refuse to admit a child on the grounds that they do not have an
EHC plan
1.28 The Equality Act 2010 prohibits schools from discriminating against disabled children
and young people in respect of admissions for a reason related to their disability.
Further education (FE) colleges manage their own admissions policies and are also
prohibited from discriminating against disabled young people in respect of
admissions. Students will need to meet the entry requirements for courses as set out
by the college, but should not be refused access to opportunities based on whether
or not they have SEN.
1.29 Children and young people without an EHC plan can be placed in special schools
and special post-16 institutions only in the following exceptional circumstances:
• where they are admitted to a special school or special post-16 institution to be
assessed for an EHC plan with their agreement (in the case of a young
person) or the agreement of their parent (in the case of a child), the local
authority, the head teacher or principal of the special school or special post-16
institution and anyone providing advice for the assessment
• where they are admitted to a special school or special post-16 institution
following a change in their circumstances with their agreement (in the case of
a young person) or the agreement of their parent (in the case of a child), the
local authority and the head teacher or principal of the special school or
special post-16 institution. Where an emergency placement of this kind is
made the local authority should immediately initiate an EHC needs
assessment or re-assessment
• where they are in hospital and admitted to a special school which is
established in a hospital, or
• where they are admitted to a special academy (including a special free
school) whose academy arrangements allow it to admit children or young
people with SEN who do not have an EHC plan
26

===== PAGE 27 =====
1.30 The last of these provisions enables the Secretary of State to approve academy
arrangements for individual special academies or special free schools that are
innovative and increase access to specialist provision for children and young people
without EHC plans. Those academies the Secretary of State authorises will make
clear through their Funding Agreement that a child or young person with SEN but no
EHC plan should be placed there only at the request of their parents or at their own
request and with the support of professional advice such as a report from an
educational psychologist. A special academy or special free school with these
arrangements will be able to admit only those children who have a type of SEN for
which they are designated. They will have adopted fair practices and arrangements
that are in accordance with the Schools Admission Code for the admission of
children without an EHC plan.
1.31 The leaders of early years settings, schools and colleges should establish and
maintain a culture of high expectations that expects those working with children and
young people with SEN or disabilities to include them in all the opportunities
available to other children and young people so they can achieve well.
1.32 There is a significant overlap between children and young people with SEN and
those with disabilities and many such children and young people are covered by both
SEN and equality legislation.
1.33 The Equality Act 2010 and Part 3 of the Children and Families Act 2014 interact in a
number of important ways. They share a common focus on removing barriers to
learning. In the Children and Families Act 2014 duties for planning, commissioning
and reviewing provision, the Local Offer and the duties requiring different agencies to
work together apply to all children and young people with SEN or disabilities. In
carrying out the duties in the Children and Families Act 2014, local authorities and
others with responsibilities under that Act, are covered by the Equality Act.
1.34 In practical situations in everyday settings, the best early years settings, schools and
colleges do what is necessary to enable children and young people to develop,
learn, participate and achieve the best possible outcomes irrespective of whether
that is through reasonable adjustments for a disabled child or young person or
special educational provision for a child or young person with SEN.
1.35 Much of the guidance in this Code of Practice focuses on the individual duties owed
to children and young people with SEN. When early years settings, schools and
colleges, local authorities and others plan and review special educational provision
and make decisions about children and young people with SEN (chapters 5 to 7) and
9) they should consider, at the same time, the reasonable adjustments and access
arrangements required for the same child or young person under the Equality Act.
27

===== PAGE 28 =====
1.36 The presumption of mainstream education is supported by provisions safeguarding
the interests of all children and young people and ensuring that the preferences of
the child’s parents or the young person for where they should be educated are met
wherever possible.
1.37 Special schools (in the maintained, academy, non-maintained and independent
sectors), special post-16 institutions and specialist colleges all have an important
role in providing for children and young people with SEN and in working
collaboratively with mainstream and special settings to develop and share expertise
and approaches.
1.38 Children and young people with SEN have different needs and can be educated
effectively in a range of mainstream or special settings. Alongside the general
presumption of mainstream education, parents of children with an EHC plan and
young people with such a plan have the right to seek a place at a special school,
special post-16 institution or specialist college. Further details of the arrangements
for Education, Health and Care Plans are set out in Chapter 9.
Supporting successful preparation for adulthood
1.39 With high aspirations, and the right support, the vast majority of children and young
people can go on to achieve successful long-term outcomes in adult life. Local
authorities, education providers and their partners should work together to help
children and young people to realise their ambitions in relation to:
• higher education and/or employment – including exploring different
employment options, such as support for becoming self-employed and help
from supported employment agencies
• independent living – enabling people to have choice and control over their
lives and the support they receive, their accommodation and living
arrangements, including supported living
• participating in society – including having friends and supportive relationships,
and participating in, and contributing to, the local community
• being as healthy as possible in adult life
1.40 All professionals working with families should look to enable children and young
people to make choices for themselves from an early age and support them in
making friends and staying safe and healthy. As children grow older, and from Year
9 in school at the latest, preparing for adult life should be an explicit element of
conversations with children and their families as the young person moves into and
through post-16 education. For children and young people in or beyond Year 9 with
28

===== PAGE 29 =====
EHC plans, local authorities have a legal duty to include provision to assist in
preparing for adulthood in the EHC plan review.
1.41 Chapter 8 provides further guidance on how to support children and young people in
preparing for adult life. Provision required for preparation for adulthood should inform
joint commissioning of services, the Local Offer, EHC needs assessments and plans,
and education and training provision for all children and young people with SEN.
29

===== PAGE 30 =====
2 Impartial information, advice and support
What this chapter covers
This chapter is about the information, advice and support which local authorities
must provide for children, young people and parents, covering special educational
needs (SEN), disability, health and social care.
Relevant legislation
Primary
Sections 19(c), 26(3), 32 and 49 of the Children and Families Act 2014
Regulations
The Special Educational Needs and Disability Regulations 2014
The Special Educational Needs (Personal Budgets) Regulations 2014
Introduction
2.1 Local authorities must arrange for children with SEN or disabilities for whom they
are responsible, and their parents, and young people with SEN or disabilities for
whom they are responsible, to be provided with information and advice about
matters relating to their SEN or disabilities, including matters relating to health and
social care. This must include information, advice and support on the take-up and
management of Personal Budgets. In addition, in carrying out their duties under Part
3 of the Children and Families Act 2014, local authorities must have regard to the
importance of providing children and their parents and young people with the
information and support necessary to participate in decisions.
2.2 Local authorities must take steps to make these services known to children, their
parents and young people in their area; head teachers, proprietors and principals of
schools and post-16 institutions in their area, and others where appropriate.
2.3 They must ensure that their Local Offer includes details of how information, advice
and support related to SEN and disabilities can be accessed and how it is resourced
(Chapter 4, The Local Offer).
2.4 Information, advice and support should be provided through a dedicated and easily
identifiable service. Local authorities have established Information, Advice and
Support Services (formerly known as Parent Partnership services) to provide
information, advice and support to parents in relation to SEN. In addition, many local
authorities provide or commission information, advice and support services for young
30

===== PAGE 31 =====
people. Local authorities should build on these existing services to provide the
information, advice and support detailed in this chapter.
2.5 Information, Advice and Support Services should be impartial, confidential and
accessible and should have the capacity to handle face-to-face, telephone and
electronic enquiries.
2.6 Local authorities should involve children, young people and parents (including local
Parent Carer Forums and Youth Forums) in the design or commissioning of services
providing information, advice and support in order to ensure that those services meet
local needs. Local authorities should do this in a way which ensures that children,
young people and parents feel they have participated fully in the process and have a
sense of co-ownership. Chapters 3 and 4 give further detail on how local authorities
should engage these groups in planning, commissioning and reviewing services, and
in developing the Local Offer.
2.7 The joint arrangements that local authorities and Clinical Commissioning Groups
(CCGs) must have for commissioning education, health and care provision for
children and young people with SEN or disabilities must include arrangements for
considering and agreeing what information and advice about education, health and
care provision is to be provided, by whom and how it is to be provided. These joint
arrangements should consider the availability of other information services in their
area (services such as youth services, Local Healthwatch, the Patient Advice and
Liaison Service (PALS) and the Family Information Service) and how these services
will work together.
2.8 When designing Information, Advice and Support Services, local authorities should
take into account the following principles:
• The information, advice and support should be impartial and provided at arm’s
length from the local authority and CCGs
• The information, advice and support offered should be free, accurate,
confidential and in formats which are accessible and responsive to the needs
of users
• Local authorities should review and publish information annually about the
effectiveness of the information, advice and support provided, including
customer satisfaction (see also Chapter 4, The Local Offer)
• Staff providing information, advice and support should work in partnership
with children, young people, parents, local authorities, CCGs and other
relevant partners
31

===== PAGE 32 =====
• The provision of information, advice and support should help to promote
independence and self-advocacy for children, young people and parents
• Staff providing information, advice and support should work with their local
Parent Carer Forum and other representative user groups (such as Youth
Forums) to ensure that the views and experiences of children, young people
and parents inform policy and practice
Who are information, advice and support for?
2.9 Local authorities should recognise the different needs of children, young people and
parents.
Children
2.10 The Children and Families Act 2014 requires local authorities to provide children with
information, advice and support relating to their SEN or disability. Many children will
access information, advice and support via their parents. However, some children,
especially older children and those in custody, may want to access information,
advice and support separately from their parents, and local authorities must ensure
this is possible.
Parents
2.11 Staff working in Information, Advice and Support Services should be trained to
support, and work in partnership with, parents.
2.12 As a child reaches the end of compulsory school age (the end of the academic year
in which they turn 16), some rights to participate in decision-making about Education
Health and Care (EHC) plans transfer from the parent to the young person, subject
to their capacity to do so, as set out in the Mental Capacity Act 2005 (See Chapter 8
for more information). Parents of young people can still access information, advice
and support on behalf of, or with, the young person. Staff should be clear about the
transfer of some rights and responsibilities to young people, and work sensitively
with parents to help them understand their role.
2.13 There may be cases where the young person and the parents do not agree on an
issue. Legally, it is the young person’s decision which prevails, subject to their
capacity. Where there are disagreements, staff providing information, advice and
support should work impartially and separately with both the parents and the young
person.
Young people
2.14 Young people are entitled to the same quality and level of information, advice and
support as parents. Local authorities should recognise the specific needs of this
32

===== PAGE 33 =====
group, while ensuring co-ordination and consistency in what is offered to children,
young people and parents.
2.15 Young people must have confidence that they are receiving confidential and
impartial information, advice and support. Staff working directly with young people
should be trained to support them and work in partnership with them, enabling them
to participate fully in decisions about the outcomes they wish to achieve. Young
people may be finding their voice for the first time, and may need support in
exercising choice and control over the support they receive (including support and
advice to take up and manage Personal Budgets). Advocacy should be provided
where necessary. Local authorities must provide independent advocacy for young
people undergoing transition assessments, provided certain conditions are met (see
section 67 of the Care Act 2014).
2.16 The service should direct young people to specialist support to help them prepare for
employment, independent living (including housing) and participation in society and
should provide access to careers advice where needed. Duties on schools and
colleges to give impartial careers advice are covered in Chapter 8, Preparing for
adulthood from the earliest years.
What needs to be provided?
2.17 The scope of this information, advice and support should cover initial concerns or
identification of potential SEN or disabilities, through to ongoing support and
provision, which may include an EHC plan. The local authority must ensure children,
young people and parents are provided with information and advice on matters
relating to SEN and disability. This should include:
• local policy and practice
• the Local Offer
• personalisation and Personal Budgets
• law on SEN and disability, health and social care, through suitably
independently trained staff
• advice for children, young people and parents on gathering, understanding
and interpreting information and applying it to their own situation
• information on the local authority’s processes for resolving disagreements,
its complaints procedures and means of redress
33

===== PAGE 34 =====
2.18 Local Healthwatch offers advice to patients and their families in relation to health
services, and CCGs and local authorities should ensure that this information is
clearly available to families, including through the Local Offer.
2.19 To meet local needs, local authorities should provide the following forms of support
through their Information, Advice and Support Service(s):
• Signposting children, young people and parents to alternative and
additional sources of advice, information and support that may be available
locally or nationally
• Individual casework and representation for those who need it, which should
include:
support in attending meetings, contributing to assessments and reviews
o
and participating in decisions about outcomes for the child or young
person
directing children, young people, parents and those who support and
o
work with them to additional support services where needed, including
services provided by the voluntary sector. These services should
include support relating to preparing for adulthood, including housing
support, careers advice and employment support
• Help when things go wrong, which should include:
• supporting children, young people and parents in arranging or attending
early disagreement resolution meetings
• supporting children, young people and parents in managing mediation,
appeals to the First-tier Tribunal (Special Educational Needs and
Disability), exclusions and complaints on matters related to SEN and
disability
• making children, young people and parents aware of the local
authority’s services for resolving disagreements and for mediation, and
on the routes of appeal and complaint on matters related to SEN and
disability (see Chapter 11, Resolving disagreements)
• Provision of advice through individual casework and through work with
parent carer support groups, local SEN youth forums or disability groups, or
training events
34

===== PAGE 35 =====
Additional support
2.20 Families may receive help from an independent supporter, provided by private
voluntary and community sector organisations, who is independent of the local
authority. Independent supporters will be recruited locally and receive accredited
training, including legal training, to help any family going through an EHC needs
assessment and the process of developing an EHC plan. Local authorities should
work with organisations that are providing independent supporters to ensure there
are arrangements agreed locally to offer help from an independent supporter to as
many families as possible who require it.
2.21 Local authorities should adopt a key working approach, which provides children,
young people and parents with a single point of contact to help ensure the holistic
provision and co-ordination of services and support. Key working may be provided
by statutory services in health, social care and education, or by the voluntary,
community, private or independent sectors. Key working can be offered to any family
where children and young people have SEN or disabilities, for example if they
receive SEN support in schools or nurseries or in preparing for adulthood.
Approaches will vary locally, but the main functions of key working support should
include some or all of the following:
• emotional and practical support as part of a trusting relationship
• enabling and empowering for decision-making and the use of Personal
Budgets
• co-ordinating practitioners and services around the child or young person
and their family
• being a single point of regular and consistent contact
• facilitating multi-agency meetings
• supporting and facilitating a single planning and joint assessment process
• identifying strengths and needs of family members
• providing information and signposting
• advocating on behalf of the child, young person and/or their family
• facilitating the seamless integration of clinical and social care services with
specialist and universal services
2.22 Guidance and examples of best practice on key working approaches are available
from the Early Support website (see the References section under Chapter 2) and
the Pathfinder information packs (see the References section under General).
Further non-statutory guidance on how to deliver impartial information, advice and
support for children, young people and parents can be found on the Information,
35

===== PAGE 36 =====
Advice and Support Services Network website – see the References section under
Chapter 2 for a link.
Support for parents in HM Armed Forces
2.23 Parents serving in HM Armed Forces can also access the Children’s Education
Advisory Service (CEAS) – an information, advice and support service established
specifically for Service parents. It covers any issue relating to their children’s
education, including SEN. More information about CEAS may be found on the CEAS
website – a link is given in the References section under Chapter 2.
Support for children and young people in custody
2.24 When securing a detained person’s EHC needs assessment the local authority must
consider whether the child, the child’s parent or the young person requires any
information, advice and support in order to enable them to take part effectively in the
assessment. If it considers that such information, advice or support is necessary the
local authority must provide it. Further guidance in respect of children and young
people who are in custody is in Chapter 10.
36

===== PAGE 37 =====
3 Working together across education, health and
care for joint outcomes
What this chapter covers
This chapter explains the duties local authorities and their partner commissioning
bodies have for developing joint arrangements for commissioning services to
improve outcomes for 0 to 25-year-old children and young people who have special
educational needs (SEN) or disabilities, including those with Education Health and
Care (EHC) plans.
It explains:
• the scope of joint commissioning arrangements
• how local partners should commission services to meet local needs and
support better outcomes
• how partnership working should inform and support the joint commissioning
arrangements
• the role that children, young people, parents and representative groups such
as Parent Carer Forums and Youth Forums have in informing commissioning
arrangements
• responsibility for decision-making in joint commissioning arrangements
• how partners should develop a joint understanding of the outcomes that their
local population of children and young people with SEN and disabilities
aspires to, and use it to produce a joint plan, which they then deliver jointly,
and review jointly
• how joint commissioning draws together accountability arrangements for key
partners
• the role of colleges as commissioners
37

===== PAGE 38 =====
Relevant legislation
Primary
Sections 23, 25, 28 and 31 of the Children and Families Act 2014
The Care Act 2014
Section 2 of the Chronically Sick and Disabled Persons Act 1970
Schedule 2, Sections 17 and section 47 of the Children Act 1989
Section 2 of the Children Act 2004
National Health Service Act 2006 (Part 3, section 75 and 14Z2)
Local Government and Public Involvement in Health Act 2007
Equality Act 2010 (including disability equality duty under s149)
Health and Social Care Act 2012
The legal framework
3.1 Section 25 of the Children and Families Act 2014 places a duty on local authorities
that should ensure integration between educational provision and training provision,
health and social care provision, where this would promote wellbeing and improve
the quality of provision for disabled young people and those with SEN.
3.2 The Care Act 2014 requires local authorities to ensure co-operation between
children’s and adults’ services to promote the integration of care and support with
health services, so that young adults are not left without care and support as they
make the transition from children’s to adult social care. Local authorities must
ensure the availability of preventative services for adults, a diverse range of high
quality local care and support services and information and advice on how adults can
access this universal support.
3.3 Local authorities and clinical commissioning groups (CCGs) must make joint
commissioning arrangements for education, health and care provision for children
and young people with SEN or disabilities (Section 26 of the Act). The term ‘partners’
refers to the local authority and its partner commissioning bodies across education,
health and social care provision for children and young people with SEN or
disabilities, including clinicians’ commissioning arrangements, and NHS England for
specialist health provision.
38

===== PAGE 39 =====
3.4 Joint commissioning should be informed by a clear assessment of local needs.
Health and Wellbeing Boards are required to develop Joint Strategic Needs
Assessments and Joint Health and Wellbeing Strategies, to support prevention,
identification, assessment and early intervention and a joined-up approach. Under
section 75 of the National Health Service Act 2006, local authorities and CCGs can
pool resources and delegate certain NHS and local authority health-related functions
to the other partner(s) if it would lead to an improvement in the way those functions
are exercised.
3.5 To take forward the joint commissioning arrangements for those with SEN or
disabilities described in this chapter, partners could build on any existing structures
established under the Children Act 2004 duties to integrate services.
3.6 The NHS Mandate, which CCGs must follow, contains a specific objective on
supporting children and young people with SEN or disabilities, including through the
offer of Personal Budgets.
3.7 Joint commissioning arrangements should enable partners to make best use of all
the resources available in an area to improve outcomes for children and young
people in the most efficient, effective, equitable and sustainable way (Good
commissioning: principles and practice, Commissioning Support Programme, (Rev)
September 2010). Partners must agree how they will work together. They should
aim to provide personalised, integrated support that delivers positive outcomes for
children and young people, bringing together support across education, health and
social care from early childhood through to adult life, and improves planning for
transition points such as between early years, school and college, between
children’s and adult social care services, or between paediatric and adult health
services.
3.8 Under the Public Sector Equality Duty (Equality Act 2010), public bodies (including
CCGs, local authorities, maintained schools, maintained nursery schools, academies
and free schools) must have regard to the need to eliminate discrimination, promote
equality of opportunity and foster good relations between disabled and non-disabled
children and young people when carrying out their functions. They must publish
information to demonstrate their compliance with this general duty and must prepare
and publish objectives to achieve the core aims of the general duty. Objectives must
be specific and measurable.
Scope of joint commissioning arrangements
3.9 Joint commissioning arrangements must cover the services for 0-25 year old
children and young people with SEN or disabilities, both with and without EHC plans.
Services will include specialist support and therapies, such as clinical treatments and
39

===== PAGE 40 =====
delivery of medications, speech and language therapy, assistive technology,
personal care (or access to it), Child and Adolescent Mental Health Services
(CAMHS) support, occupational therapy, habilitation training, physiotherapy, a range
of nursing support, specialist equipment, wheelchairs and continence supplies and
also emergency provision. They could include highly specialist services needed by
only a small number of children, for instance children with severe learning disabilities
or who require services which are commissioned centrally by NHS England (for
example some augmentative and alternative communication systems, or health
provision for children and young people in the secure estate or secure colleges).
3.10 Local authorities, NHS England and their partner CCGs must make arrangements
for agreeing the education, health and social care provision reasonably required by
local children and young people with SEN or disabilities. In doing so they should take
into account provision being commissioned by other agencies, such as schools,
further education colleges and other education settings. Partners should commission
provision for children and young people who need to access services swiftly, for
example because they need emergency mental health support or have sustained a
serious head injury.
3.11 Joint commissioning must also include arrangements for:
• securing EHC needs assessments
• securing the education, health and care provision specified in EHC plans, and
• agreeing Personal Budgets
3.12 Local joint commissioning arrangements must consider:
• what advice and information is to be provided about education, health and
care provision for those who have SEN or are disabled and by whom it is to
be provided
• how complaints about education, health and social care provision can be
made and are dealt with, and
• procedures for ensuring that disagreements between local authorities and
CCGs (and NHS England for specialist services) are resolved as quickly as
possible
The outputs of this work must be presented publicly in the Local Offer (see Chapter
4, The Local Offer, paragraphs 4.30 and 4.31).
40

===== PAGE 41 =====
The joint commissioning cycle
Establishing effective partnerships across education,
health and care
3.13 Local authorities must work to integrate educational provision and training provision
with health and social care provision where they think that this would promote the
wellbeing of children and young people with SEN or disabilities, or improve the
quality of special educational provision. Local partners must co-operate with the
local authority in this. The NHS Mandate, NHS Act 2006 and Health and Social Care
Act 2012 make clear that NHS England, CCGs and Health and Wellbeing Boards
must promote the integration of services.
3.14 The Care Act 2014 also requires local authorities to work to promote the integration
of adult care and support with health services.
3.15 Working Together to Safeguard Children (2013) includes requirements for local
agencies to work together to assess the social care needs of individual children and
young people who may benefit from early help, and for local authorities and their
partners to have a clear line of accountability for the commissioning and/or provision
of services designed to safeguard and promote the welfare of children and young
people.
3.16 The local authority must review its educational, training and social care provision,
consulting a range of partners including children and young people with SEN or
disabilities, and their parents and carers. This consultation will inform the
41

===== PAGE 42 =====
development and review of the Local Offer (Section 27 of the Children and Families
Act 2014).
3.17 The local authority must engage other partners it thinks appropriate to support
children and young people with SEN and disabilities. This might include voluntary
organisations, CAMHS, local therapists, Jobcentre Plus and their employment
support advisers, training/apprenticeship/supported employment providers, housing
associations, careers advisers, leisure and play services. Local authorities and
CCGs should consider the role that private, voluntary and community sector
providers can play in delivering services. More information is given on roles and
responsibilities of key agencies from paragraph 3.70 onwards.
Partnership with children, young people and parents
3.18 At a strategic level, partners must engage children and young people with SEN and
disabilities and children’s parents in commissioning decisions, to give useful insights
into how to improve services and outcomes. Local authorities, CCGs and NHS
England must develop effective ways of harnessing the views of their local
communities so that commissioning decisions on services for those with SEN and
disabilities are shaped by users’ experiences, ambitions and expectations. To do
this, local authorities and CCGs should engage with local Healthwatch organisations,
patient representative groups, Parent Carer Forums, groups representing young
people with SEN and disabilities and other local voluntary organisations and
community groups.
3.19 Under Section 14Z2 of the NHS Act 2006 each CCG must exercise its functions to
secure that individuals to whom the services are being, or may be, provided, are
involved in in planning commissioning arrangements, in the development and
consideration of proposals for change, and in decisions affecting the operation of
commissioning arrangements where implementation would have an impact on the
manner in which services are delivered or the range of services available. Links to a
range of useful resources to help them do this are provided in the References
section under Chapter 3.
42

===== PAGE 43 =====
Joint understanding: Joint Strategic Needs Assessments
3.20 There is a clear relationship between population needs, what is procured for children
and young people with SEN and disabilities, and individual EHC plans.
Joint Strategic Needs
Delivered by Health and Wellbeing
Assessment/Joint Health and Board. Considers needs of whole
Wellbeing Strategy population.
Local authority/CCG applies JSNA analysis
to 0-25 children and young people with SEN
Joint commissioning
and disabilities to agree shared outcomes,
working with partners, eg children and young
people and Parent Carer Forums.
Local offer Local authority publishes a Local Offer setting out what
support is available for 0-25 year olds with SEN or
disabilities.
EHC
An EHC plan starts by focusing on outcomes that are
Plan
important to the individual. Any education, health or
care provision required to meet a child/young person’s
needs related to SEN must be included in the plan
(see Chapter 9).
3.21 Each upper tier local authority (county council or unitary authority) has a Health and
Wellbeing Board. The Health and Wellbeing Board is a strategic forum which
provides leadership across the health, public health and social care systems. The
board’s job is to improve the health and wellbeing of the local population and reduce
health inequalities. Health and Wellbeing Boards have a duty to promote greater
integration and partnership working, including through joint commissioning,
integrated provision and pooled budgets. The membership of the board must include
the Director of Children’s Services, Director of Public Health, Director of Adult Social
Services and a minimum of one elected member from the local authority, a CCG
representative and a local Healthwatch representative. Membership from
communities and wider partners is decided locally.
3.22 The Joint Strategic Needs Assessment (JSNA) is the means by which the Board
understands and agrees the needs of all local people. It is the basis for the joint
health and wellbeing strategy which sets the priorities for joint action. Further
information about the JSNA is available on the GOV.UK website – a link is given in
the References section under Chapter 3.
3.23 The JSNA considers the needs of the local community as a whole, including specific
analysis of the needs of vulnerable groups including disabled children and young
43

===== PAGE 44 =====
people and those with SEN, those needing palliative care and looked after children.
Local partners across education, health and social care should work together to
establish what targeted commissioning is needed to address the needs identified.
3.24 The JSNA will inform the joint commissioning decisions made for children and young
people with SEN and disabilities, which will in turn be reflected in the services set out
in the Local Offer. At an individual level, services should co-operate where
necessary in arranging the agreed provision in an EHC plan. Partners should
consider how they will work to align support delivered through mechanisms such as
the early help assessment and how SEN support in schools can be aligned both
strategically and operationally. They should, where appropriate, share the costs of
support for individual children and young people with complex needs, so that they do
not fall on one agency.
Responsibility for decision-making in joint commissioning
arrangements
3.25 Local authorities and CCGs have considerable freedom in how they work together to
deliver integrated support that improves children and young peoples’ outcomes.
However, local governance arrangements must be in place to ensure clear
accountability for commissioning services for children and young people with SEN
and disabilities from birth to the age of 25. There must be clear decision-making
structures so that partners can agree the changes that joint commissioning will bring
in the design of services. This will help ensure that joint commissioning is focused on
achieving agreed outcomes. Partners must also be clear about who is responsible
for delivering what, who the decision-makers are in education, health and social
care, and how partners will hold each other to account in the event of a
disagreement. The partners must be able to make a decision on how they will meet
the needs of children and young people with SEN or disabilities in every case.
3.26 Elected members, governing bodies of CCGs and chief executives across education,
health and social care should provide leadership for integrated working.
Arrangements for children and young people with SEN or disabilities should be
specifically accountable to Lead Members for Children’s Services and Directors for
Children’s Services in line with their statutory duties. It should be clear who can
make decisions both operationally (for example, deciding what provision should be
put in an EHC plan) and strategically (for example, what provision will be
commissioned locally for disabled children and young people and those with SEN) in
exercising statutory duties.
44

===== PAGE 45 =====
Using information to understand and predict need for
services
3.27 To inform commissioning decisions, partners should draw on the wide range of local
data sets as well as qualitative information about the likely education, health and
social care needs of children and young people with SEN or disabilities.
3.28 Data-sets include but are not restricted to:
• population and demographic data
• prevalence data for different kinds of SEN and disability among children and
young people at national level – for example through the Child and Maternal
Health Intelligence Network (CHiMat)
• numbers of local children and young people with EHC plans and their main
needs
• use of out-of-area placements for those with low-incidence needs
• analysis of key performance indicators that are shared across health,
education and social care as part of the new joint commissioning
arrangements
• the outcomes of developmental assessments (including the two-year-old
check)
• information from the Early Years Foundation Stage (EYFS) profile
• where children or young people with SEN or disabilities are educated
• an analysis of local challenges and sources of health inequalities – for
example, the level of local economic deprivation, historic data about previous
support offered through statements and EHC plans, and the education and
health needs of young offenders
• employment rates for young people leaving education
• local data on disabled children from the register of disabled children in their
area (including those with impaired hearing and vision) which local authorities
are required to keep under Schedule 2 of the Children Act 1989. Local
authorities should ensure that registers of disabled children and young
people, and particularly details of those with a vision or hearing impairment,
are kept accurate and up to date, as such low-incidence needs are particularly
difficult to plan for from national data sets
45

===== PAGE 46 =====
3.29 Local authorities must review their provision, taking into consideration the
experiences of children, young people and families (including through representative
groups such as Parent Carer Forums), voluntary and community sector providers
and local Healthwatch. Information from such reviews will contribute to future
arrangements and the effectiveness of local joint working.
3.30 Joint commissioning arrangements should be based on evidence about which
services, support and interventions are effective. Local areas should maintain up-to-
date information on research and guidance about good practice, for example through
referring to NICE guidance and Campbell collaboration/Cochrane collaboration.
Joint planning
Deciding on shared outcomes
3.31 Local partners should identify the outcomes that matter to children and young people
with SEN or disabilities to inform the planning and delivery of services and the
monitoring of how well services have secured those outcomes. Outcomes refer to
the benefit or difference made to an individual as a result of an intervention at three
levels:
• Individual outcomes such as might be set out in an EHC plan: for example,
Martha can communicate independently with her friends at playtime
• Service level outcomes: for example, paternal mental health has improved in
10 families
• Strategic outcomes: for example, there has been a 10% increase in young
people supported into employment and independent living
3.32 To achieve such outcomes, provision has to be put in place. In the examples above,
a speech and language and social skills programme, a short breaks programme and
a newly commissioned transitions strategy, respectively.
3.33 Partners should use their joint understanding to determine the shared outcomes they
seek to achieve, for example improvement in educational attainment, levels of
mental health and wellbeing and reductions in health inequalities. They should draw
on national priorities (for example, those set through the NHS Outcomes
Framework), local priorities (for example, the JSNA and Joint Health and Wellbeing
Strategy). This should be a transparent process – the local community should be
aware both of what the shared outcomes are and the plan to achieve them. This
requirement could be discharged through the requirement to consult publicly on the
Local Offer.
46

===== PAGE 47 =====
3.34 The Children and Young People’s Outcome Forum report Improving Children and
Young People’s Health Outcomes: a system wide response is a useful resource that
partners should draw upon. It is available from the GOV.UK website (see References
section under Chapter 3 for a link).
Making best use of resources
3.35 Joint commissioning arrangements should help partners identify scope for working
more efficiently together. Partners should assess the extent to which activities
contribute to their local priorities and outcomes and decide which services should be
commissioned or decommissioned, in consultation with children and young people
with SEN or disabilities, their parents, or representative groups such as Parent Carer
Forums.
3.36 Under Section 10 of the Children Act 2004 and Section 75 of the National Health
Service Act 2006 local authorities and CCGs have a statutory duty to consider the
extent to which children and young people’s needs could be met more effectively
through integrating services and aligning or pooling budgets in order to offer greater
value for money, improve outcomes and/or better integrate services for children and
young people with SEN or disabilities. Under the Care Act 2014, local authorities
must ensure the provision of preventative services, the diversity and quality of care
and support services for adults, and the provision of information and advice on care
and support locally.
3.37 To make the best use of resources, partners should consider how an integrated
approach can best support:
• prevention – for example using the outcomes of developmental assessments
as outlined in the EYFS to target early help for children experiencing
developmental delay can reduce the need for specialist services later on
• early identification of needs
• the resilience of families and local services to enable children and young
people with more complex needs to participate actively in their local
community
• better access to services
• the development of good language, communication and mental health through
universal services so that effective use is made of specialist speech and
language therapy services and CAMHS
47

===== PAGE 48 =====
• better transitions between life stages and settings, including from early years
to primary education, primary to secondary and secondary to further
education (FE), and
• children and young people in preparing for adult life
Personal Budgets
3.38 Young people and parents of children who have EHC plans have the right to request
a Personal Budget, which may contain elements of education, social care and health
funding. Partners must set out in their joint commissioning arrangements their
arrangements for agreeing Personal Budgets. They should develop and agree a
formal approach to making fair and equitable allocations of funding and should set
out a local policy for Personal Budgets that includes:
• a description of the services across education, health and social care that
currently lend themselves to the use of Personal Budgets
• the mechanisms of control for funding available to parents and young people
including:
direct payments – where individuals receive the cash to contract,
o
purchase and manage services themselves
an arrangement – whereby the local authority, school or college holds
o
the funds and commissions the support specified in the EHC plan (these
are sometimes called notional budgets)
third party arrangements – where funds (direct payments) are paid to
o
and managed by an individual or organisation on behalf of the child’s
parent or the young person
a combination of the above
o
• clear and simple statements of eligibility criteria and the decision-making
processes that underpin them
3.39 To do this, partners should:
• identify and agree the funding streams and services for inclusion and develop
the necessary infrastructure to support their inclusion
• identify the links to be made locally between the SEN offer and Personal
Health Budgets for children and adults
48

===== PAGE 49 =====
• identify and establish the information, advice and support necessary at an
area and individual level to help families consider options for, and to take up
and manage, Personal Budgets
• develop a pathway for Personal Budgets within the process of EHC needs
assessment and EHC plan development and the workforce and cultural
changes necessary for a person-centred approach
• identify how the new joint commissioning strategies will support greater choice
and control year on year, as the market is developed and funding streams are
freed from existing contractual arrangements
• as an integral part of this, partners should ensure children, young people and
families are involved in the decision-making processes at both an individual
and a strategic level
Joint delivery
3.40 At a strategic level, when commissioning training for professionals partners should
consider whether combined service delivery, training or a common set of key skills
would help professionals and providers adapt to meeting the needs of children and
young people with SEN or disabilities in a more personalised way. This could include
commissioning ‘key working’ roles to support children and young people with SEN
and disabilities and their parents, particularly at key points such as diagnosis, EHC
plan development and transition.
3.41 Partners should also consider whether and how specialist staff can train the wider
workforce so they can better identify need and offer support earlier – for example,
educational psychologists or speech and language therapists training professionals
such as teachers or GPs to identify and support children and young people with
mental health problems or speech and language difficulties, respectively. This may
involve NHS Local Education and Training Boards. Some areas have involved
parent carers in delivery of workforce development programmes.
Joint review to improve service offered
3.42 Joint commissioning is an ongoing improvement cycle. Over time, partners may shift
the focus of their activity as the needs of the local population change and delivery of
services improves.
3.43 Partners should agree how they will work together to monitor how outcomes in
education, health and care are being improved as a result of the provision they
make. Partners should monitor the changing needs of the local population of children
and young people with SEN and disabilities closely and, crucially, establish whether
or not the provision arranged for them is improving outcomes. EHC plans for
49

===== PAGE 50 =====
individual children and young people must be similarly reviewed to see if they are
enabling the child or young person to achieve their desired outcomes, so that where
appropriate the commissioned provision can be changed. Feedback from children,
young people and families is useful in identifying gaps in provision. Any changes in
provision commissioned locally should be reflected in the Local Offer.
3.44 Local authorities must review the special educational provision and social care
provision in their areas for children and young people who have SEN or disabilities
and the provision made for local children and young people who are educated out of
the area, working with the partners to their joint commissioning arrangements. The
local authority must consult with children and young people with SEN or disabilities
and their parents and as part of this should consult with family representatives such
as Parent Carer Forums. Joint commissioning arrangements must consider the
needs of children and young people with SEN and disabilities. Partners should also
work with commissioners of adult services to ensure that there are smooth
transitions between children’s and adult services. This will involve working with a
range of professionals in the public, private, voluntary and community sectors and
will help those with SEN or disabilities prepare for adulthood, including living
independently and employment.
Education, Health and Care: roles and responsibilities
Designated Medical/Clinical Officer
3.45 Partners should ensure there is a Designated Medical Officer (DMO) to support the
CCG in meeting its statutory responsibilities for children and young people with SEN
and disabilities, primarily by providing a point of contact for local partners, when
notifying parents and local authorities about children and young people they believe
have, or may have, SEN or a disability, and when seeking advice on SEN or
disabilities. This does not alter the CCG’s responsibility for commissioning health
provision.
3.46 The DMO provides the point of contact for local authorities, schools and colleges
seeking health advice on children and young people who may have SEN or
disabilities, and provides a contact (or contacts) for CCGs or health providers so that
appropriate notification can be given to the local authority of children under
compulsory school age who they think may have SEN or disabilities. The DMO can
support schools with their duties under the ‘Supporting Pupils with Medical
Conditions’ guidance. The DMO would not routinely be involved in assessments or
planning for individuals, except in the course of their usual clinical practice, but would
be responsible for ensuring that assessment, planning and health support is carried
out. Some CCGs may delegate key decisions to the DMO (for example, agreeing the
health services in an EHC plan).
50

===== PAGE 51 =====
3.47 The DMO should have an appropriate level of clinical expertise to enable them to
exercise these functions effectively, and should be designated as the DMO in their
job description. There may be one DMO for several CCGs and local authorities,
where there are joint arrangements or shared commissioning responsibilities, and
given the age range of EHC plans from birth to 25, the DMO may need to liaise with
colleagues outside paediatrics.
3.48 This is a non-statutory role which would usually be carried out by a paediatrician, but
there is local flexibility for the role to be undertaken by a suitably competent qualified
and experienced nurse or other health professional (in which case the role would be
the Designated Clinical Officer). The person in this role should have appropriate
expertise and links with other professionals to enable them to exercise it in relation to
children and young adults with EHC plans from the age of 0 to 25 in a wide range of
educational institutions.
Children’s social care
3.49 Where a child or young person has been assessed as having social care needs in
relation to their SEN or disabilities social care teams:
• must secure social care provision under the Chronically Sick and Disabled
Persons Act (CSDPA) 1970 which has been assessed as being necessary to
support a child or young person’s SEN and which is specified in their EHC
plan
• should provide early years providers, schools and colleges with a contact for
social care advice on children and young people with SEN and disabilities
• must undertake reviews of children and young people with EHC plans where
there are social care needs
• should make sure that for looked after children and care leavers the
arrangements for assessing and meeting their needs across education, health
and social care are co-ordinated effectively within the process of care and
pathway planning, in order to avoid duplication and delay, to include in
particular liaising with the Virtual School Head (VSH) for looked after children
3.50 Where children or young people with SEN or disabilities also have a child in need or
child protection plan, the social worker within the SEN team should ensure the
statutory timescales for social care assessments are met and any assessments are
aligned with EHC needs assessments wherever possible. Working Together to
Safeguard Children (2013) gives full details. A link is available in the References
section under Chapter 3.
51

===== PAGE 52 =====
Adult social care
3.51 Young people with SEN or disabilities turning 18 may become eligible for adult social
care services, regardless of whether they have an EHC plan or whether they have
been receiving services from children’s social care.
3.52 The Care Act 2014 and the associated regulations and guidance set out the
requirements on local authorities when young people are approaching, or turn, 18
and are likely to require an assessment for adult care and support. These are
intended to support effective transition from children’s to adult social care services.
For those already receiving support from children’s services, the Care Act makes it
clear that local authorities must continue to provide children’s services until adult
provision has started or a decision is made that the young person’s needs do not
meet the eligibility criteria for adult care and support following an assessment.
Children’s services must not be discontinued simply because a young person has
reached their 18th birthday. More information on this is given in Chapter 8, Preparing
for Adulthood.
3.53 Local authorities and their partners must co-operate in the provision of adult care
and support in promoting the individual’s wellbeing and local authorities must:
• promote the integration of adult care and support and health services
• arrange the provision of preventative resources that can be accessed by
those who require support but who do not have eligible needs (under the Care
Act 2014).
• ensure a diverse and high quality range of services to meet assessed care
and support needs
3.54 Local authorities must provide information and advice on the range of services
available. They should include in their Local Offer relevant information and advice on
local provision and how to receive an assessment for transition to adult care and
support.
3.55 The transition from children’s to adult services needs to be well managed and should
take place at a time that is appropriate for the individual. This is particularly important
where young people’s assessed needs do not meet eligibility criteria for adult
services.
3.56 Local authorities and their partners should work together to ensure effective and well
supported transition arrangements are in place; that assessment and review
processes for both Care plans and EHC plans are aligned; that there is effective
integration with health services, and that there is a good range of universal provision
52

===== PAGE 53 =====
for inclusion in the Local Offer. Young people and their families should not be
expected to repeatedly provide duplicate information to different services, or to
attend numerous reviews, or receive support that is not co-ordinated and joined up.
There should be clear and joined-up decision-making processes and lines of
accountability for considering when the transition to adult services should take place
and ensuring that children’s services continue to be in place for as long as required.
3.57 Local authorities should consider ways of supporting carers. Parent carers have
often had to give up paid work after their child leaves full time education. Loss of
paid employment can have a significant impact on the carer’s wellbeing and self-
esteem as well as a significant impact on the family’s financial circumstances. Taking
a whole family approach to care and support planning that sets out a ‘five-day offer’
for a young person and support for a carer to manage an increased caring role
(which ideally allows them to stay in paid work if they wish to do so) can help families
manage the transition and save money by avoiding costly out-of-area placements.
More information on this is provided in the Care Act Statutory Guidance. Chapter 8
of this Code provides guidance on packages of provision across five days for young
people with EHC plans.
3.58 Support for carers includes any support assessed as being reasonably required by
the learning difficulties and disabilities which result in the child or young person
having SEN. It can include any services assessed under an early help assessment
and/or under Section 17 or Section 47 of the Children Act 1989 or eligible needs
identified by assessments under adult care provisions. It can also include services
for parents and carers which will support the child’s outcomes, such as mental health
support.
Health services for children and young people with SEN and
disabilities and their families
3.59 Health services for children and young people with SEN or disabilities provide early
identification, assessment and diagnosis, intervention and review for children and
young people with long-term conditions and disabilities, for example chronic fatigue
syndrome, anxiety disorders or life-threatening conditions such as inoperable heart
disease. Services are delivered by health professionals including paediatricians,
psychiatrists, nurses and allied health professionals such as occupational therapists,
speech and language therapists, habilitation trainers, physiotherapists and
psychologists. In addition, public health services for children ensure a whole
population approach to health and wellbeing including preventative services such as
immunisation for the whole population and targeted immunisation for the most
vulnerable.
53

===== PAGE 54 =====
3.60 Health services support early identification of young children who may have SEN,
through neonatal screening programmes, the Healthy Child Programme, and
specialist health and developmental assessment where concerns have been raised.
Community paediatricians in conjunction with other health professionals, particularly
therapists, are often the first people to notify young children with SEN to local
authorities. They provide diagnostic services and health reports for EHC needs
assessments. CCGs, NHS Trusts, and NHS Foundation Trusts must inform the
appropriate local authority if they identify a child under compulsory school age as
having, or probably having, a disability or SEN (Section 23 of the Children and
Families Act 2014).
3.61 The multi-disciplinary child health team, including paediatricians, therapists, clinical
psychologists, dieticians and specialist nurses such as health visitors, school nurses
and community children’s nursing teams, provide intervention and review for children
and young people with SEN and disabilities and should contribute to supporting key
transition points, including to adulthood. They aim to provide optimum health care for
the children, addressing the impact of their conditions, managing consequences for
the families and preventing further complications.
3.62 Health professionals advise education services on managing health conditions such
as epilepsy and diabetes, and health technologies such as tube feeding,
tracheostomy care and ventilation in schools. They are able to provide an ongoing
overview of health and wellbeing. They seek advice from paediatric specialists when
necessary and facilitate training for education staff.
3.63 Therapists have important and specific roles in supporting children and young people
with SEN or disabilities, working directly with children and young people, advising
and training education staff and setting programmes for implementation at home and
in school.
Local authorities’ role in delivering health services
3.64 Local authorities and CCGs should consider how best to integrate the
commissioning of services for children and young people who have SEN with the
CCG’s broad responsibility for commissioning health services for other groups,
including preventative services, and the local authority’s responsibility for health
protection and health improvement for the local population. The local authority in
particular has responsibility for securing a range of public health services which may
be relevant for children and young people, and should consider how this can be
aligned with the arrangements for commissioning services for children and young
people who are disabled or who have SEN – for example, the Healthy Child
Programme for pre-school and school-age children, including school nursing. A
factsheet has been produced on the public health responsibilities of local authorities
54

===== PAGE 55 =====
and is available from the GOV.UK website (see References section under Chapter 3
for a link).
The health commissioning duty
3.65 As health service commissioners, CCGs have a duty under Section 3 of the NHS Act
2006 to arrange health care provision for the people for whom they are responsible
to meet their reasonable health needs. (NHS England may also have commissioning
responsibility for some children and young people – for example in some secure
children’s homes – and therefore a similar duty to meet their reasonable needs.) This
is the fundamental basis of commissioning in the NHS. Where there is provision
which has been agreed in the health element of an EHC plan, health commissioners
must put arrangements in place to secure that provision. This issue is explored in
more detail in Chapter 9.
Schools and post-16 settings as commissioners
3.66 Schools, including early years providers, and post-16 settings can also be
commissioners in their own right. Schools have a notional SEN budget and many
schools will commission services (such as speech and language therapy, pastoral
care and counselling services) to support pupils. Schools must work with the local
authority in developing the Local Offer, which could include school-commissioned
services. The school must set out its SEN policy and information on its approach to
supporting children and young people with SEN. The school’s governing body must
ensure that arrangements are in place in schools to support pupils at school with
medical conditions and should ensure that school leaders consult health and social
care professionals, pupils and parents to make sure that the needs of children with
medical conditions are effectively supported.
3.67 Joint commissioning arrangements should reflect this local commissioning and
should ensure services being commissioned by schools are suitably supported to
deliver positive outcomes for children and young people.
Regional commissioning: meeting the needs of children
and young people with highly specialised and/or low-
incidence needs
3.68 Partners should consider strategic planning and commissioning of services or
placements for children and young people with high levels of need across groups of
authorities, or at a regional level. The benefits include:
• greater choice for parents and young people, enabling them to access a wider
range of services or educational settings
55

===== PAGE 56 =====
• greater continuity of support for children and young people in areas where
there is a great deal of movement across local authorities (for example, in
London)
NHS England already commissions specialist health services at a regional and
national level, so local partners will need to engage and integrate these
arrangements to support local joint commissioning activity.
3.69 When a health body is considering a placement that includes an education
commitment, such as a placement in residential care, they should consult the local
authority prior to the decision being made (see Chapter 10, paragraph 10.49). The
Winterbourne View Concordat emphasised the need for high quality local provision –
local authorities and CCGs should work together to consider how they will reduce
out-of-area placements. Regional commissioning may help them to do this. Statutory
guidance on long-term residential care is available on the GOV.UK website (see
References section under Chapter 3 for a link).
Local accountability
3.70 The roles and responsibilities of bodies involved in joint commissioning
arrangements are summarised below:
Agency Key responsibilities for SEN or Accountability
Disability
Local authority Leading integration arrangements for Lead Member for Children’s
Children and Young People with SEN or Services and Director for
Children’s Services (DCS)
disabilities
Children’s and Children’s and adult social care services Lead Member for Children
adult social must co-operate with those leading the and Adult Social Care, and
integration arrangements for children Director for Children’s
care
and young people with SEN or Services (DCS), Director for
disabilities to ensure the delivery of care Adult Social Services
and support is effectively integrated in (DASS).
the new SEN system.
Health and The Health and Wellbeing Board must Membership of the Health
Wellbeing ensure a joint strategic needs and Wellbeing Board must
assessment (JSNA) of the current and include at least one local
Board
future needs of the whole local elected councillor, as well
population is developed. The JSNA will as a representative of the
form the basis of NHS and local local Healthwatch
authorities’ own commissioning plans, organisation. It must also
across health, social care, public health include the local DCS,
DASS, and a senior CCG
56

===== PAGE 57 =====
Agency Key responsibilities for SEN or Accountability
Disability
and children’s services. representative and the
Director of Public Health.
This is likely to include specific needs of
children and young people with SEN or In practice, most Health
disabilities. and Wellbeing Boards
include more local
councillors, and many are
chaired by cabinet
members.
Clinical To co-operate with the local authority in CCGs will be held to
Commissioning jointly commissioning services, ensuring account by NHS England.
there is sufficient capacity contracted to
Group CCGs are also subject to
deliver necessary services, drawing the
local accountability, for
attention of the local authority to groups
example, to the Health and
and individual children and young people
Wellbeing Board for how
with SEN or disabilities, supporting
well they contribute to
diagnosis and assessment, and
delivering the local Health
delivering interventions and review.
and Wellbeing Strategy.
Each CCG has a governing
body and an Accountable
Officer who are responsible
for ensuring that the CCG
fulfils its duties to exercise
its functions effectively,
efficiently and economically
and to improve the quality
of services and the health
of the local population
whilst maintaining value for
money.
NHS England NHS England commissions specialist Secretary of State for
services which need to be reflected in Health
local joint commissioning arrangements
(for example augmentative and
alternative communication systems, or
provision for detained children and
young people in relevant youth
accommodation).
Healthwatch Local Healthwatch organisations are a Local Healthwatch
key mechanism for enabling people to organisations represent the
share their views and concerns – to voice of people who use
ensure that commissioners have a clear health and social care on
57

===== PAGE 58 =====
Agency Key responsibilities for SEN or Accountability
Disability
picture of local communities’ needs and the Health and Wellbeing
that this is represented in the planning Board. They are
and delivery of local services. This can independent, but funded by
include supporting children and young local authorities.
people with SEN or disabilities.
Maintained Mainstream schools have duties to use Accountability is through
nurseries and best endeavours to make the provision Ofsted and the annual
schools required to meet the SEN of children and report that schools have to
(including young people. All schools must publish provide to parents on their
academies) details of what SEN provision is children’s progress.
available through the information report
and co-operate with the local authority in
drawing up and reviewing the Local
Offer.
Schools also have duties to make
reasonable adjustments for disabled
children and young people, to support
medical conditions and to inform parents
and young people if SEN provision is
made for them.
More information about the role of early
years settings, schools and post-16
institutions is given in Chapters 5 to 7.
Colleges Mainstream colleges have duties to use Accountable through Ofsted
best endeavours to make the provision and performance tables
required to meet the SEN of children and such as destination and
young people. Mainstream and special progress measures.
colleges must also co-operate with the
local authority in drawing up and
reviewing the Local Offer.
All colleges have duties to make
reasonable adjustments for disabled
children and young people.
More information about duties on the
further education sector is in Chapter 7.
3.71 These arrangements do not affect the disagreement resolution and complaints
procedures described in Chapter 11. Local authorities must include in their Local
Offer information on how complaints can be made about services.
58

===== PAGE 59 =====
4 The Local Offer
What this chapter covers
This chapter explains the statutory duties on local authorities to develop and publish
a Local Offer setting out the support they expect to be available for local children and
young people with special educational needs (SEN) or disabilities. It covers:
• preparing and reviewing the Local Offer, including involving children, young
people and parents and those providing services
• publishing the Local Offer
• publishing comments on the Local Offer and the action to be taken in
response
• what must be included in the Local Offer
• information, advice and support
Relevant legislation
Primary
Sections 27, 28, 30, 32, 41, 49, and 51-57 of the Children and Families Act 2014
Equality Act 2010
Regulations
The Special Educational Needs and Disability Regulations 2014 (Part 4)
What is the Local Offer?
4.1 Local authorities must publish a Local Offer, setting out in one place information
about provision they expect to be available across education, health and social care
for children and young people in their area who have SEN or are disabled, including
those who do not have Education, Health and Care (EHC) plans. In setting out what
they ‘expect to be available’, local authorities should include provision which they
believe will actually be available.
4.2 The Local Offer has two key purposes:
• To provide clear, comprehensive, accessible and up-to-date information about
the available provision and how to access it, and
59

===== PAGE 60 =====
• To make provision more responsive to local needs and aspirations by directly
involving disabled children and those with SEN and their parents, and
disabled young people and those with SEN, and service providers in its
development and review
4.3 The Local Offer should not simply be a directory of existing services. Its success
depends as much upon full engagement with children, young people and their
parents as on the information it contains. The process of developing the Local Offer
will help local authorities and their health partners to improve provision.
4.4 The Local Offer must include provision in the local authority’s area. It must also
include provision outside the local area that the local authority expects is likely to be
used by children and young people with SEN for whom they are responsible and
disabled children and young people. This could, for example, be provision in a
further education college in a neighbouring area or support services for children and
young people with particular types of SEN that are provided jointly by local
authorities. It should include relevant regional and national specialist provision, such
as provision for children and young people with low-incidence and more complex
SEN.
4.5 Local authorities and those who are required to co-operate with them need to comply
with the Equality Act 2010, including when preparing, developing and reviewing the
Local Offer.
4.6 The Special Educational Needs and Disability Regulations 2014 provide a common
framework for the Local Offer. They specify the requirements that all local authorities
must meet in developing, publishing and reviewing their Local Offer, and cover:
• the information to be included
• how the Local Offer is to be published
• who is to be consulted about the Local Offer
• how children with SEN or disabilities and their parents and young people with
SEN or disabilities will be involved in the preparation and review of the Local
Offer, and
• the publication of comments on the Local Offer and the local authority’s
response, including any action it intends to take in relation to those comments
60

===== PAGE 61 =====
4.7 The Local Offer should be:
• collaborative: local authorities must involve parents, children and young
people in developing and reviewing the Local Offer. They must also
co-operate with those providing services
• accessible: the published Local Offer should be easy to understand, factual
and jargon free. It should be structured in a way that relates to young people’s
and parents’ needs (for example by broad age group or type of special
educational provision). It should be well signposted and well publicised
• comprehensive: parents and young people should know what support is
expected to be available across education, health and social care from age 0
to 25 and how to access it. The Local Offer must include eligibility criteria for
services where relevant and make it clear where to go for information, advice
and support, as well as how to make complaints about provision or appeal
against decisions
• up to date: when parents and young people access the Local Offer it is
important that the information is up to date
• transparent: the Local Offer should be clear about how decisions are made
and who is accountable and responsible for them
Preparing and reviewing the Local Offer
Involving children and young people and parents
4.8 Local authorities must involve children with SEN or disabilities and their parents and
young people with SEN or disabilities in:
• planning the content of the Local Offer
• deciding how to publish the Local Offer
• reviewing the Local Offer, including by enabling them to make comments
about it
4.9 Local authorities should do this in a way which ensures that children, young people
and parents feel they have participated fully in the process and have a sense of co-
ownership. This is often referred to as ‘co-production’. Local authorities should take
steps to ensure that their arrangements for involving children, young people and
parents include a broadly representative group of the children with SEN or
disabilities and their parents and young people with SEN or disabilities in their area.
61

===== PAGE 62 =====
Parent Carer Forums, young people’s forums and other local groups are useful ways
to engage families.
4.10 Local authorities should publicise in their Local Offer the ways in which they will
involve children, young people and parents in developing and reviewing it. Local
authorities should ensure that they provide support that enables children, young
people and parents to contribute to decision-making at this strategic level and the
Local Offer should include details of this support, which should include Parent Carer
Forums and local voluntary organisations.
Young people
4.11 Local authorities must engage young people directly in developing and reviewing the
Local Offer and should consider setting up a forum, or a range of forums, to do so.
Local authorities should make every effort to engage a cross-section of young
people with a range of SEN and disabilities, in a variety of settings and
circumstances and at different ages within the 16–25 age range. Local authorities
should make every effort to establish the issues on which young people most want to
be engaged. They should also consider using a variety of methods to engage young
people. These could include surveys and social media or young people’s forums,
and making existing consultation groups, such as a local youth council, accessible to
young people with SEN or disabilities. Young people should also have opportunities
to be engaged independently of their parents.
4.12 When organising participation events for young people, local authorities should
endeavour to ensure full accessibility by considering:
• timing: holding events when young people are most likely to be free and not
when they are likely to be in education (unless arrangements have been
made with their education providers)
• transport: explaining to young people how to travel to an event, with clear
instructions, maps and, particularly in rural areas, details of a taxi service
which is accessible to those with disabilities
• physical accessibility: for example, access for a number of wheelchair
users
• accessibility of content: providing materials in different formats and
tailored to meet different cognitive abilities and reading skills and supporting
different communication needs, avoiding jargon and acronyms wherever
possible and where this is not possible, explaining terms used
62

===== PAGE 63 =====
• age appropriateness: keeping membership of young people’s forums under
review as the participants get older, and bearing in mind the very different
stages that young people will be at from the age of 16 to 25
Whatever the means of consultation and engagement local authorities should let
participants know the outcome of discussions so that they will know what will happen
as a result of their contribution.
Parents
4.13 Effective parent participation can lead to a better fit between families’ needs and the
services provided, higher satisfaction with services, reduced costs (as long-term
benefits emerge), better value for money and better relationships between those
providing services and those using them. Local authorities and parents should work
together to establish the aims of parent participation, to mark progress and build
trust. To enable effective parental participation, local authorities should consider in
particular the timing of events and meetings – for example, organising them during
the school day while children are at school and ensuring that parents have enough
notice to allow them to organise childcare.
Involving schools, colleges, health services and others
4.14 Local authorities and their partner bodies and agencies must co-operate with each
other in the development and review of the Local Offer. This is essential so that the
Local Offer provides a comprehensive, transparent and accessible picture of the
range of services available.
4.15 The most relevant local partners who are required to co-operate with the local
authority in relation to the Local Offer include:
• the governing bodies of schools that the local authority maintains
• the proprietors of academies and free schools in the local authority’s area
• the proprietors of non-maintained special schools that are in the local
authority’s area or provide education or training for children and young people
in the local authority’s area
• the governing bodies of further education colleges and sixth form colleges that
are in the local authority’s area or are attended or likely to be attended by
young people from their area
• the management committees of pupil referral units that are in the local
authority’s area or are attended or likely to be attended by young people from
their area
63

===== PAGE 64 =====
• the proprietors of independent specialist colleges and independent schools
specially organised to make provision for children and young people with SEN
which have been included on the list of institutions approved by the Secretary
of State for the purpose of enabling parents and young people to request that
they are named on an EHC plan and are in the local authority’s area or are
attended or likely to be attended by children and young people in their area
• any other person (other than a school or college) that makes special
educational provision for children or young people for whom the local authority
is responsible, including providers of relevant early education
• NHS England and any relevant health bodies including:
clinical commissioning groups (CCGs) whose areas coincide with or fall
o
within the local authority’s area or which have a duty under section 3 of
the National Health Service Act 2006 to arrange for the provision of
services for any children or young people for whom the local authority
is responsible
an NHS Trust or NHS Foundation Trust which provides services in the
o
local authority’s area or for children and young people for whom the
authority is responsible, or
a Local Health Board with functions in relation to children and young
o
people for whom the local authority is responsible
4.16 The local authority should engage with the providers of relevant early years
education, particularly those in receipt of early education funding.
4.17 The local authority must also ensure that all its officers co-operate with each other in
respect of the Local Offer. This must include those whose roles relate to social
services or who will contribute to helping young people make a successful transition
to adulthood – for example those working in housing and economic regeneration.
Keeping the Local Offer under review
4.18 The requirement on local authorities to publish comments on their Local Offer and
their response to those comments is relevant to their duty to keep under review the
educational and training provision and social care provision for children and young
people with SEN or disabilities and their role in contributing, with their partner CCGs,
to Joint Strategic Needs Assessments and the development of local Health and
Wellbeing Strategies (see chapter 3).
4.19 Local authorities must keep their educational and training provision and social care
provision under review and this includes the sufficiency of that provision. When
64

===== PAGE 65 =====
considering any reorganisation of SEN provision decision makers must make clear
how they are satisfied that the proposed alternative arrangements are likely to lead
to improvements in the standard, quality and/or range of educational provision for
children with SEN (School organisation (maintained schools), Annex B: Guidance for
Decision-makers, DfE 2014 – see the References section under Chapter 4 for a link).
4.20 Local authorities should link reviews of education, health and social care provision to
the development and review of their Local Offer and the action they intend to take in
response to comments. This will help to identify gaps in provision and ensure that
the Local Offer is responsive to the needs of local children and young people and
their families. At a strategic level local authorities should share what they have
learned from the comments they receive with local Health and Wellbeing Boards
where appropriate, to help inform the development of Health and Wellbeing
Strategies and the future provision of services for children and young people with or
without EHC plans.
Publishing comments about the Local Offer
4.21 Local authorities must publish comments about their Local Offer received from or on
behalf of children with SEN or disabilities and their parents and young people with
SEN or disabilities.
4.22 Comments must be published if they relate to:
• the content of the Local Offer, which includes the quality of existing provision
and any gaps in the provision
• the accessibility of information in the Local Offer
• how the Local Offer has been developed or reviewed
4.23 It is up to local authorities to decide on the format for publishing comments but they
should consult children and young people with SEN or disabilities and parents and
representative organisations such as Parent Carer Forums and local organisations
providing information, advice and support to parents, children and young people
about this, including the local authority’s Information, Advice and Support Service.
They should make clear how they have sought comments about the Local Offer.
4.24 Local authorities must publish a summary of comments at least annually, although
this is expected to be an ongoing process. They must ensure that comments are
published in a form that does not enable any individual to be identified.
4.25 Local authorities are not expected to publish responses to every comment
individually but could, for example, adopt a ‘you said, we did’ approach. They are not
required to publish abusive or vexatious comments or complaints about the service
65

===== PAGE 66 =====
provided to an individual since there are established routes to bring such complaints.
The Local Offer should make clear what these routes are and how to access them.
Taking action in response to comments about the Local Offer
4.26 Local authorities must publish their response to comments received within the Local
Offer and this must include details of the action they intend to take. They should
consult children and young people with SEN or disabilities and the parents of
children with SEN or disabilities in relation to the action they intend to take.
4.27 Where appropriate, local authorities should also feed back comments to
commissioners of services and the services themselves, including those in
neighbouring local authorities. Comments should be used to inform commissioning
decisions and decisions about the specific nature and type of provision that local
families want.
4.28 Local authorities should ensure they have access to good quality data to inform their
decisions when reviewing provision and taking action to develop their Local Offer.
What must be included in the Local Offer?
4.29 Local authorities must include information about all the areas specified in the
Special Educational Needs and Disability Regulations 2014. They may wish to
include wider information, taking account of their discussions with children with SEN
or disabilities and their parents and young people with SEN or disabilities.
4.30 The Local Offer must include information about:
• special educational, health and social care provision for children and young
people with SEN or disabilities – this should include online and blended
learning
• details of how parents and young people can request an assessment for an
EHC plan
• arrangements for identifying and assessing children and young people’s SEN
– this should include arrangements for EHC needs assessments
• other educational provision, for example sports or arts provision, paired
reading schemes
• post-16 education and training provision
• apprenticeships, traineeships and supported internships
66

===== PAGE 67 =====
• information about provision to assist in preparing children and young people
for adulthood (see paragraphs 4.52 to 4.56)
• arrangements for travel to and from schools, post-16 institutions and early
years providers
• support to help children and young people move between phases of
education (for example from early years to school, from primary to secondary)
• sources of information, advice and support in the local authority’s area relating
to SEN and disabilities including information and advice provided under
Section 32 of the Children and Families Act 2014, forums for parents and
carers and support groups
• childcare, including suitable provision for disabled children and those with
SEN
• leisure activities
• support available to young people in higher education, particularly the
Disabled Students Allowance (DSA) and the process and timescales for
making an application for DSA
• arrangements for resolving disagreements and for mediation, and details
about making complaints
• parents’ and young people’s rights to appeal a decision of the local authority
to the First-tier Tribunal (SEN and disability) in respect of SEN and provision
• the local authority’s accessibility strategy (under paragraph 1 Schedule 10 to
the Equality Act 2010)
• institutions approved under Section 41 of the Children and Families Act 2014
4.31 The Local Offer should cover:
• support available to all children and young people with SEN or disabilities
from universal services such as schools and GPs
• targeted services for children and young people with SEN or disabilities who
require additional short-term support over and above that provided routinely
as part of universal services
• specialist services for children and young people with SEN or disabilities who
require specialised, longer term support
67

===== PAGE 68 =====
Educational, health and care provision
Educational and training provision
4.32 The local authority must set out in its Local Offer an authority-wide description of the
special educational and training provision it expects to be available in its area and
outside its area for children and young people in its area who have SEN or
disabilities from providers of relevant early years education, maintained schools,
non-maintained special schools, pupil referral units, independent institutions
approved under section 41 of the Children and Families Act 2014, and the full range
of post-16 providers. This includes information about the arrangements the local
authority has for funding children and young people with SEN, including any
agreements about how providers will use any budget that has been delegated to
them.
It includes the arrangements providers have in place for:
• identifying the particular SEN of children and young people
• consulting with parents of disabled children with SEN and disabled young
people with SEN or disabilities
• securing the services, provision and equipment required by children and
young people with SEN or disabilities
• supporting disabled children and young people and those with SEN in moving
between phases of education and preparing for adulthood and independent
living
and information about:
• approaches to teaching, adaptations to the curriculum and the learning
environment for children and young people with SEN or disabilities and
additional learning support for those with SEN
• enabling available facilities to be accessed by disabled children and young
people and those with SEN (this should include ancillary aids and assistive
technology, including Augmentative and Alternative Communication (AAC))
• assessing and reviewing pupils’ and students’ progress towards outcomes,
including how providers work with parents and young people in doing so
• securing expertise among teachers, lecturers or other professionals to support
children and young people with SEN or disabilities – this should include
professional development to secure expertise at different levels:
68

===== PAGE 69 =====
awareness (to give a basic awareness of a particular type of SEN,
o
appropriate for all staff who will come into contact with a child or young
person with that type of SEN)
enhanced (how to adapt teaching and learning to meet a particular
o
type of SEN, for early years practitioners, class and subject
teachers/lecturers and teaching assistants working directly with the
child or young person on a regular basis), and
specialist (in-depth training about a particular type of SEN, for staff
o
who will be advising and supporting those with enhanced-level skills
and knowledge)
• assessing and evaluating the effectiveness of the education and training
provision the local authority makes for children and young people with SEN or
disabilities
• activities that are available to disabled children and young people and those
with SEN, including physical activities and extra-curricular activities, and
• supporting the emotional, mental and social development of disabled children
and young people and those with SEN (this should include extra pastoral
support arrangements for listening to the views of pupils and students with
SEN and measures to prevent bullying)
4.33 The above will include arrangements for supporting children who are looked after by
the local authority and have SEN.
Schools
4.34 Schools have additional duties under the Special Educational Needs and Disability
Regulations 2014. Schools must publish more detailed information about their
arrangements for identifying, assessing and making provision for pupils with SEN
(see Chapter 6, Schools).
4.35 The information must also include information about the arrangements for the
admission of disabled pupils, the steps taken to prevent disabled pupils from being
treated less favourably than other pupils, the facilities provided to assist access for
disabled pupils and the schools’ accessibility plans. The school-specific information
should relate to the schools’ arrangements for providing a graduated response to
children’s SEN. It should elaborate on the information provided at a local authority
wide level in the Local Offer.
69

===== PAGE 70 =====
4.36 The Local Offer must make clear where this information can be found and must
make clear how young people and parents can find relevant information published by
post-16 institutions about their SEN provision (see Chapter 7).
Early years
4.37 When securing funded early education for two-, three- and four-year-olds local
authorities must promote equality of opportunity for disabled children. This should
include securing relevant expertise among early years providers and working with
parents to ensure that appropriate provision is in place to enable each child to
flourish. Local authorities must also secure sufficient childcare for working parents
and must work with providers to plan and manage local provision to meet the needs
of families and children in their area.
4.38 Local authorities must publish in their Local Offer information about childcare
options available to parents including the range of expertise to support children with
SEN or disabilities and should publish information about:
• free early education places and eligibility criteria
• relevant services from other agencies such as Portage, Health Visitors and
Early Support
• arrangements for identifying and assessing children’s needs in the early years
• support available to parents to aid their child’s development at home, and
• arrangements for reviewing children’s progress, including progress checks
and health and development reviews between the ages of 2 and 3
Other educational provision
4.39 Information about educational provision must include where to find the list of non-
maintained special schools and independent schools catering wholly or mainly for
children with SEN, and Independent Specialist Colleges in England, including details
of which institutions have been approved by the Secretary of State, to give parents
and young people a statutory right to request that they are named on an EHC plan. It
should also include:
• the special educational provision (including Area SEN co-ordinators
(SENCOs), and SEN support or learning support services, sensory support
services or specialist teachers, and therapies such as speech and language
therapy where they educate or train a child or young person) made available
to mainstream schools, early years providers, special units, alternative
70

===== PAGE 71 =====
provision and other settings (including home-based services), whether
provided by the local authority or others
• local arrangements for collaboration between institutions to support those with
SEN (for example, cluster or partnership working between post-16 institutions
or shared services between schools)
• the local authority’s arrangements for providing top-up funding for children
and young people with high needs in mainstream and specialist settings
• support for children and young people who have been released from custody
– this should include support offered by Youth Offending Teams in relation to
education
Health
4.40 Building on the Joint Strategic Needs Assessment the Local Offer must include
information about provision made by health professionals for children and young
people with SEN or disabilities. This must include:
• services assisting relevant early years providers, schools and post-16
institutions to support children and young people with medical conditions, and
• arrangements for making those services which are available to all children
and young people in the area accessible to those with SEN or disabilities
It should also include:
• speech and language therapy and other therapies such as physiotherapy and
occupational therapy and services relating to mental health (these must be
treated as special educational provision where they educate or train a child or
young person (see Chapter 9 paragraphs 9.73 to 9.76)
• wheelchair services and community equipment, children’s community nursing,
continence services
• palliative and respite care and other provision for children with complex health
needs
• other services, such as emergency care provision and habilitation support
• provision for children and young people’s continuing care arrangements
(including information on how these are aligned with the local process for
developing EHC plans, which is described in Chapter 3), and
71

===== PAGE 72 =====
• support for young people when moving between healthcare services for
children to healthcare services for adults
4.41 Local authorities and their partner CCGs must work together to ensure that this
information is available through the Local Offer.
Social care and other provision
4.42 The Local Offer must include information about social care services and other
provision supporting children and young people with SEN or disabilities. This should
include:
• childcare
• leisure activities
• support for young people when moving between social care services for
children to social care services for adults, including information on how and
when the transfer is made
• support for young people in living independently and finding appropriate
accommodation and employment
4.43 Under the Care Act 2014 local authorities must provide an information and advice
service on the adult care and support system. This should include information on
types of care and support, local provision and how to access it, accessing financial
advice in relation to it and how to raise concerns. Local authorities must indicate in
their Local Offer where this information can be found.
4.44 Local authorities must provide a range of short breaks for disabled children, young
people and their families, and prepare a short breaks duty statement giving details of
the local range of services and how they can be accessed, including any eligibility
criteria (The Breaks for Carers of Disabled Children Regulations 2011). Local
authorities must publish a short breaks statement on their website and review it on a
regular basis, taking account of the needs of local parents and carers. The statement
will therefore form a core part of the Local Offer.
4.45 Parent carers of disabled children often have significant needs for support, to enable
them to support their children effectively. It is important that children’s and adult
services work together to ensure needs are met. The Local Offer must set out the
support groups and others who can support parent carers of disabled children and
how to contact them. Part 3 of the Children Act 1989 gives individuals with parental
responsibility for a disabled child the right to an assessment of their needs by a local
authority. Local authorities must assess on the appearance of need, as well as on
request, and must explicitly have regard to the wellbeing of parent carers in
72

===== PAGE 73 =====
undertaking an assessment of their needs. Following a parent carer’s needs
assessment, the local authority must decide whether the parent carer needs support
to enable them to support their disabled child and, if so, decide whether to provide
services under section 17 of the Children Act 1989. Relevant services may include
short breaks provision and support in the home.
Training and apprenticeships
4.46 The Local Offer must identify training opportunities, supported employment services,
apprenticeships, traineeships, supported internships and support available from
supported employment services available to young people in the area to provide a
smooth transition from education and training into employment. This should include
information about additional support available to young people – for example via the
Department for Work and Pensions’ Access to Work fund – such as teaching and
learning support, job coaching in the workplace, and provision of specialist
equipment. Local authorities should engage with providers of apprenticeships and
traineeships and educational institutions offering supported internships to ensure that
the information they publish is of good quality and to identify providers who have
particular expertise relevant to young people with SEN or disabilities.
4.47 Local authorities should include information on how young people can apply for
these opportunities or make clear in their Local Offer where this information can be
found. The information should include any entry requirements, including age limits
and educational attainment.
Transport
4.48 Transport can be an important factor in the support for children and young people
with SEN or disabilities. The Local Offer must include information about
arrangements for transport provision, including for those up to age 25 with an EHC
plan, and this should include local authorities’ policy statements.
4.49 Local authorities must ensure that suitable travel arrangements are made where
necessary to facilitate an eligible child’s attendance at school. Section 508B of the
Education Act 1996 requires local authorities to make such school travel
arrangements as they consider necessary for children within their area. Such
arrangements must be provided free of charge. Section 508C of the Act gives local
authorities discretionary powers to make school travel arrangements for other
children not covered by section 508B. Such transport does not have to be provided
free of charge.
4.50 Local authorities must publish a transport policy statement each year setting out the
travel arrangements they will make to support young people aged 16-19 and
learners with learning difficulties and/or disabilities (LDD) aged up to 25, to access
73

===== PAGE 74 =====
further education. This should include any arrangements for free or subsidised
transport.
4.51 Local authorities must include in their Local Offer information about:
• any specific arrangements for specialised transport (for example, specially
fitted buses)
• any support available from the local authority or others with transport costs
and should include information about:
• any support that is offered to children and young people to help them use
transport, including public transport, and
• any training given to aid independent travel
Support available to children and young people to help them
prepare for adulthood
4.52 Local authorities must set out in the Local Offer the support available to help
children and young people with SEN or disabilities move into adulthood. Support
should reflect evidence of what works in achieving good outcomes and must include
information about preparing for and finding employment, finding somewhere to live,
and participating in the community.
4.53 Preparing for and finding employment should include information about:
• pathways to employment such as apprenticeships, traineeships and
supported internships and how to apply for them
• support available from supported employment services, such as job coaches,
and how to obtain that support
• support available from employment agencies
• support available from Year 8 to help children and young people plan their
careers, including signposting to where they can obtain information and
advice about setting up their own enterprise, and
• financial support available, including from the Department for Work and
Pensions, when people with learning difficulties or disabilities are looking for
work or once they are employed, including ‘in work’ benefit calculations and
specialist advice on Work Choice, Residential Training, The Work Programme
and Access to Work
74

===== PAGE 75 =====
4.54 Finding somewhere to live should include information about:
• finding accommodation, including information about different housing options
such as social housing, housing association accommodation, private renting,
shared housing and shared ownership
• how to apply for accommodation, and where to get financial and other support
(such as a personal assistant, assistive technology or modifications to a
home) and more detailed advice on accommodation
• advice, for people eligible for social care or health support, about what
support is available to help them personally, for example in managing their
Personal Budget or recruiting a personal assistant, and
• opportunities and support to learn the skills needed to live in supported, semi-
supported or independent accommodation
4.55 Participating in the community should include information about:
• leisure and social activities, including opportunities for influencing local
decision-making
• how young people can access mainstream community facilities and local
youth services (for example, access to staff with expertise in supporting young
people with different needs)
• volunteering opportunities and the support available to access them
• care support available to help young people access social opportunities (for
example, a personal assistant or assistive technology) and develop
friendships, and how to apply for that support, and
• support in using the internet and social media to find information and develop
and maintain friendships, including where they can go for guidance on using
the internet safely and how to protect themselves against cyber-bullying and
exploitation
4.56 The Care Act 2014 requires local authorities to establish and maintain a service for
providing people in its area with information and advice about the adult care and
support system.
75

===== PAGE 76 =====
Information about how to seek an EHC needs assessment
4.57 The Local Offer must include information about how to request a needs assessment
for an EHC plan. A request is likely to happen where special educational provision
currently being made for them by their early years setting, school or college from
their own resources, is not enabling the child or young person to make adequate
progress.
4.58 The information should include:
• how the local authority will consider a request for an assessment and inform
parents and young people of their decision
• how parents, children and young people will be involved in the assessment
process
• what support is available to help families during the needs assessment
process and the development of an EHC plan
• the timescales involved in the assessment process
• the process for making an EHC plan
and must include:
• information about the option of having a Personal Budget, including a local
policy for Personal Budgets, produced with parents and young people. This
should provide:
a description of the services across education, health and social care
o
that currently lend themselves to the use of Personal Budgets
the mechanisms of control for funding available to parents and young
o
people including direct payments, arrangements and third party
arrangements (see Chapter 9, Education, Health and Care needs
assessments and plans)
clear and simple statements setting out eligibility criteria and the
o
decision-making processes that underpin them
the support available to help families manage a Personal Budget
o
• arrangements for complaints, mediation, disagreement resolution and appeals
76

===== PAGE 77 =====
Information, advice and support
4.59 The Local Offer must provide information for children, parents and young people
about where to get information and advice.
4.60 All local authorities must have arrangements for information and advice and should
ensure that advice and guidance for children and young people is tailored
appropriately for them (see Chapter 2).
4.61 Clear, comprehensive and accessible information should be published about the
support available to children and young people with SEN and disabled children and
young people and the opportunities to participate in strategic decision-making. Local
authorities and CCGs must ensure that they publicise the availability of information
and advice and opportunities to participate in strategic decision-making. Early years
providers, schools, colleges, and other relevant services should tell parents and
young people about the availability of local impartial information, advice and support.
For young people this should include access to information, advice and support on
preparing for adulthood, such as advice and support on securing paid employment
and/or meaningful occupation, independent living and finding accommodation, health
and social care and participating actively in their local communities.
Publishing the Local Offer
4.62 Local authorities must make their Local Offer widely accessible and on a website.
They must publish their arrangements for enabling those without access to the
internet to get the information. They must also enable access for different groups,
including disabled people and those with different types of SEN.
77

===== PAGE 78 =====
5 Early years providers
What this chapter covers
This chapter explains the action early years providers should take to meet their
duties in relation to identifying and supporting all children with special educational
needs (SEN), whether or not they have an Education, Health and Care (EHC) plan.
Relevant legislation
Primary
The following sections of the Children and Families Act 2014:
• Co-operating generally: governing body functions: Section 29
• Children and young people with SEN but no EHC plan: Section 34
• Children with SEN in maintained nurseries: Section 35
• Using best endeavours to secure special educational provision: Section 66
• SEN co-ordinators: Section 64
• Informing parents and young people: Section 68
• SEN information report: Section 69
• Duty to support pupils with medical conditions: Section 100
The Equality Act 2010
Regulations
The Statutory Framework for the Early Years Foundation Stage
The Special Educational Needs and Disability Regulations 2014
78

===== PAGE 79 =====
Improving outcomes: high aspirations and expectations
for children with SEN
5.1 All children are entitled to an education that enables them to:
• achieve the best possible educational and other outcomes, and
• become confident young children with a growing ability to communicate
their own views and ready to make the transition into compulsory education
5.2 Providers of early years education, that is all early years providers in the maintained,
private, voluntary and independent sectors that a local authority funds, are required
to have regard to this Code including the principles set out in Chapter 1.
5.3 The Early Years Foundation Stage (EYFS) is the statutory framework for children
aged 0 to 5 years. All early years providers must follow the safeguarding and
welfare requirements of the EYFS and the learning and development requirements,
unless an exemption from these has been granted.
5.4 Providers must have arrangements in place to support children with SEN or
disabilities. These arrangements should include a clear approach to identifying and
responding to SEN. The benefits of early identification are widely recognised –
identifying need at the earliest point, and then making effective provision, improves
long-term outcomes for children.
5.5 All those who work with young children should be alert to emerging difficulties and
respond early. In particular, parents know their children best and it is important that
all practitioners listen and understand when parents express concerns about their
child’s development. They should also listen to and address any concerns raised by
children themselves.
5.6 Maintained nursery schools must:
• use their best endeavours to make sure that a child with SEN gets the
support they need
• ensure that children with SEN engage in the activities of school alongside
children who do not have SEN
• designate a teacher to be responsible for co-ordinating SEN provision (the
SEN co-ordinator, or SENCO)
• inform parents when they are making special educational provision for a
child
79

===== PAGE 80 =====
They must also prepare a report on:
• the implementation of their SEN policy
• their arrangements for the admission of disabled children
• the steps being taken to prevent disabled children from being treated less
favourably than others
• the facilities provided to enable access to the school for disabled children,
and
• their accessibility plan showing how they plan to improve access over time
5.7 Early years providers must provide information for parents on how they support
children with SEN and disabilities, and should regularly review and evaluate the
quality and breadth of the support they offer or can access for children with SEN or
disabilities. Maintained nursery schools and all providers of relevant early education
to children with SEN must co-operate with the local authority in reviewing the
provision that is available locally (see Chapter 3), and in developing the Local Offer
(see Chapter 4). Providers should work in partnership with other local education
providers to explore how different types of need can be met most effectively.
5.8 Local authorities must ensure that all providers they fund in the maintained, private,
voluntary and independent sectors are aware of the requirement on them to have
regard to the SEN Code of Practice and to meet the needs of children with SEN and
disabilities. When securing funded early education for two-, three- and four-year-olds
local authorities should promote equality and inclusion for children with disabilities or
SEN. This includes removing barriers that prevent children accessing early
education and working with parents to give each child support to fulfil their potential.
5.9 Where assessment indicates that support from specialist services is required, it is
important that children receive it as quickly as possible. Joint commissioning
arrangements should seek to ensure that there are sufficient services to meet the
likely need in an area (Chapter 3, Working together across Education, Health and
Care for joint outcomes). The Local Offer should set out clearly what support is
available from different services, including early years, and how it can be accessed.
Equality Act 2010
5.10 All early years providers have duties under the Equality Act 2010. In particular, they
must not discriminate against, harass or victimise disabled children, and they must
make reasonable adjustments, including the provision of auxiliary aids and services
for disabled children, to prevent them being put at substantial disadvantage. This
duty is anticipatory – it requires thought to be given in advance to what disabled
children and young people might require and what adjustments might need to be
80

===== PAGE 81 =====
made to prevent that disadvantage. All publicly funded early years providers must
promote equality of opportunity for disabled children. There is further detail on the
disability discrimination duties under the Equality Act in Chapter 1, Introduction. The
guidance in this chapter should be read in the light of the guidance in Chapter 1
which focuses on inclusive practice and removing barriers to learning.
Medical conditions
5.11 All early years providers should take steps to ensure that children with medical
conditions get the support required to meet those needs. This is set out in the EYFS
framework.
SEN in the early years
5.12 All early years providers are required to have arrangements in place to identify and
support children with SEN or disabilities and to promote equality of opportunity for
children in their care. These requirements are set out in the EYFS framework. The
EYFS framework also requires practitioners to review children’s progress and share
a summary with parents. In addition, the ‘Early years outcomes’ is an aid for
practitioners, including child minders, nurseries and others such as inspectors, to
help them to understand the outcomes they should be working towards. Links to the
EYFS framework and the guide to early years outcomes are provided in the
References section under Chapter 5.
5.13 Some children need support for SEN and disabilities at home or in informal settings
before, or as well as, the support they receive from an early years provider. Provision
for children who need such support should form part of the local joint commissioning
arrangements and be included in the Local Offer.
From birth to two – early identification
5.14 Parents’ early observations of their child are crucial. Children with more complex
developmental and sensory needs may be identified at birth. Health assessments,
such as the hearing screening test, which is used to check the hearing of all new-
born babies, enable very early identification of a range of medical and physical
difficulties. Health services, including paediatricians, the family’s general practitioner,
and health visitors, should work with the family, support them to understand their
child’s needs and help them to access early support.
5.15 Where a health body is of the opinion that a young child under compulsory school
age has, or probably has, SEN, they must inform the child’s parents and bring the
child to the attention of the appropriate local authority. The health body must also
give the parents the opportunity to discuss their opinion and let them know about any
voluntary organisations that are likely to be able to provide advice or assistance. This
81

===== PAGE 82 =====
includes the educational advice, guidance and any intervention to be put in place at
an early point and before the child starts school.
5.16 This support can take a number of forms, including:
• specialist support from health visitors, educational psychologists, speech and
language therapists or specialist teachers, such as a teacher of the deaf or vision
impaired. These specialists may visit families at home to provide practical
support, answering questions and clarifying needs
• training for parents in using early learning programmes to promote play,
communication and language development
• home-based programmes, such as Portage, which offer a carefully structured
system to help parents support their child’s early learning and development
5.17 Early Support supports the better delivery and co-ordination of services for disabled
children, and their families, including training for professional or trained independent
volunteers providing a single point of contact or key working. (See References
section under Chapter 2 for a link to the Early Support Programme.)
5.18 From September 2014, 2-year-olds for whom Disability Living Allowance is paid will
be entitled to free early education.
5.19 Information about these services should be included in the Local Offer.
Early years provision
5.20 The majority of 3- and 4-year-olds, and many younger children, attend some form of
early years provision. The EYFS framework sets the standards that all Ofsted-
registered early years providers, and schools offering early years provision, must
meet to ensure that children learn and develop well and are kept healthy and safe.
This includes ongoing assessment of children’s progress. Early years providers and
educational settings should have arrangements in place that include a clear
approach to assessing SEN. This should be part of the setting’s overall approach to
monitoring the progress and development of all children.
5.21 In assessing progress of children in the early years, practitioners can use the non-
statutory Early Years Outcomes guidance as a tool to assess the extent to which a
young child is developing at expected levels for their age. The guidance sets out
what most children do at each stage of their learning and development. These
include typical behaviours across the seven areas of learning:
• communication and language
82

===== PAGE 83 =====
• physical development
• personal, social and emotional development
• literacy
• mathematics
• understanding of the world
• expressive arts and design
5.22 The EYFS framework includes two specific points for providing written assessments
for parents and other professionals – when the child is aged two and at the end of
the reception year – which are detailed below.
Progress check at age two
5.23 When a child is aged between two and three, early years practitioners must review
progress and provide parents with a short written summary of their child’s
development, focusing in particular on communication and language, physical
development and personal, social and emotional development. This progress check
must identify the child’s strengths and any areas where the child’s progress is
slower than expected. If there are significant emerging concerns (or identified SEN
or disability) practitioners should develop a targeted plan to support the child,
involving other professionals such as, for example, the setting’s SENCO or the Area
SENCO, as appropriate. The summary must highlight areas where:
• good progress is being made
• some additional support might be needed
• there is a concern that a child may have a developmental delay (which may
indicate SEN or disability)
5.24 It must describe the activities and strategies the provider intends to adopt to address
any issues or concerns. If a child moves settings between the ages of two and three
it is expected that the progress check will be undertaken in the setting where the
child has spent most time.
5.25 Health visitors currently check children’s physical development milestones between
ages two and three as part of the universal Healthy Child Programme. From 2015, it
is proposed to introduce an integrated review that will cover the development areas
in the Healthy Child Programme two-year review and the EYFS two-year progress
check. The integrated review will:
83

===== PAGE 84 =====
• identify the child’s progress, strengths and needs at this age in order to
promote positive outcomes in health and wellbeing, learning and
development
• enable appropriate intervention and support for children and their families,
where progress is less than expected, and
• generate information which can be used to plan services and contribute to
the reduction of inequalities in children’s outcomes
Assessment at the end of the EYFS – the EYFS profile
5.26 The EYFS profile provides parents, practitioners and teachers with a well-rounded
picture of a child’s knowledge, understanding and abilities. A profile is usually
completed for children in the final term of the year in which they turn five. It is
particularly helpful for children with SEN and should inform plans for future learning
and identify any additional needs for support.
Identifying needs in the early years
5.27 In addition to the formal checks, early years practitioners working with children
should monitor and review the progress and development of all children throughout
the early years.
5.28 Where a child appears to be behind expected levels, or where a child’s progress
gives cause for concern, practitioners should consider all the information about the
child’s learning and development from within and beyond the setting, from formal
checks, from practitioner observations and from any more detailed assessment of
the child’s needs. From within the setting practitioners should particularly consider
information on a child’s progress in communication and language, physical
development and personal, social and emotional development. Where any specialist
advice has been sought from beyond the setting, this should also inform decisions
about whether or not a child has SEN. All the information should be brought together
with the observations of parents and considered with them.
5.29 A delay in learning and development in the early years may or may not indicate that
a child has SEN, that is, that they have a learning difficulty or disability that calls for
special educational provision. Equally, difficult or withdrawn behaviour does not
necessarily mean that a child has SEN. However, where there are concerns, there
should be an assessment to determine whether there are any causal factors such as
an underlying learning or communication difficulty. If it is thought housing, family or
other domestic circumstances may be contributing to the presenting behaviour, a
multi-agency approach, supported by the use of approaches such as the Early Help
Assessment, should be adopted.
84

===== PAGE 85 =====
5.30 Identifying and assessing SEN for young children whose first language is not English
requires particular care. Early years practitioners should look carefully at all aspects
of a child’s learning and development to establish whether any delay is related to
learning English as an additional language or if it arises from SEN or disability.
Difficulties related solely to learning English as an additional language are not SEN.
5.31 Where a child has a significantly greater difficulty in learning than their peers, or a
disability that prevents or hinders a child from making use of the facilities in the
setting and requires special educational provision, the setting should make that
provision. In all cases, early identification and intervention can significantly reduce
the need for more costly interventions at a later stage.
5.32 Special educational provision should be matched to the child’s identified SEN.
Children’s SEN are generally thought of in the following four broad areas of need
and support – see Chapter 6, paragraph 6.28 onwards, for a fuller explanation:
• communication and interaction
• cognition and learning
• social, emotional and mental health
• sensory and/or physical needs
5.33 These areas give an overview of the range of needs that providers should plan for.
However, individual children often have needs that cut across all these areas and
their needs may change over time. For instance speech, language and
communication needs can also be a feature of a number of other areas of SEN, and
children with an Autism Spectrum Disorder may have needs across all areas. The
special educational provision made for a child should always be based on an
understanding of their particular strengths and needs and should seek to address
them all, using well-evidenced interventions targeted at areas of difficulty and, where
necessary, specialist equipment or software. This will help to overcome barriers to
learning and participation. Support should be family centred and should consider the
individual family’s needs and the best ways to support them.
5.34 Reviewing the effectiveness of interventions in enabling children to make progress
can itself be part of the assessment of need, informing the next steps to be taken as
part of a graduated approach to support, as described in ‘SEN support in the early
years’ below. It may be necessary to test out interventions as part of this process,
both to judge their effectiveness for the child and to provide further information about
the precise nature of their needs.
85

===== PAGE 86 =====
5.35 There is a wide range of information available on early years and early intervention
and on different areas of need and the most effective interventions. For more
information and links to useful resources see Annex 2: Improving practice and staff
training in education settings.
SEN support in the early years
5.36 It is particularly important in the early years that there is no delay in making any
necessary special educational provision. Delay at this stage can give rise to learning
difficulty and subsequently to loss of self-esteem, frustration in learning and to
behaviour difficulties. Early action to address identified needs is critical to the future
progress and improved outcomes that are essential in helping the child to prepare for
adult life (Chapter 8, Preparing for adulthood from the earliest years).
5.37 Where a setting identifies a child as having SEN they must work in partnership with
parents to establish the support the child needs.
5.38 Where a setting makes special educational provision for a child with SEN they
should inform the parents and a maintained nursery school must inform the parents.
All settings should adopt a graduated approach with four stages of action: assess,
plan, do and review.
Assess
5.39 In identifying a child as needing SEN support, the early years practitioner, working
with the setting SENCO and the child’s parents, will have carried out an analysis of
the child’s needs. This initial assessment should be reviewed regularly to ensure that
support is matched to need. Where there is little or no improvement in the child’s
progress, more specialist assessment may be called for from specialist teachers or
from health, social services or other agencies beyond the setting. Where
professionals are not already working with the setting, the SENCO should contact
them, with the parents’ agreement.
Plan
5.40 Where it is decided to provide SEN support, and having formally notified the parents,
(see 5.38 above), the practitioner and the SENCO should agree, in consultation with
the parent, the outcomes they are seeking, the interventions and support to be put in
place, the expected impact on progress, development or behaviour, and a clear date
for review. Plans should take into account the views of the child. The support and
intervention provided should be selected to meet the outcomes identified for the
child, based on reliable evidence of effectiveness, and provided by practitioners with
relevant skills and knowledge. Any related staff development needs should be
identified and addressed.
86

===== PAGE 87 =====
5.41 Parents should be involved in planning support and, where appropriate, in reinforcing
the provision or contributing to progress at home.
Do
5.42 The early years practitioner, usually the child’s key person, remains responsible for
working with the child on a daily basis. With support from the SENCO, they should
oversee the implementation of the interventions or programmes agreed as part of
SEN support. The SENCO should support the practitioner in assessing the child’s
response to the action taken, in problem solving and advising on the effective
implementation of support.
Review
5.43 The effectiveness of the support and its impact on the child’s progress should be
reviewed in line with the agreed date. The impact and quality of the support should
be evaluated by the practitioner and the SENCO working with the child’s parents and
taking into account the child’s views. They should agree any changes to the
outcomes and support for the child in light of the child’s progress and development.
Parents should have clear information about the impact of the support provided and
be involved in planning next steps.
5.44 This cycle of action should be revisited in increasing detail and with increasing
frequency, to identify the best way of securing good progress. At each stage parents
should be engaged with the setting, contributing their insights to assessment and
planning. Intended outcomes should be shared with parents and reviewed with them,
along with action taken by the setting, at agreed times.
5.45 The graduated approach should be led and co-ordinated by the setting SENCO
working with and supporting individual practitioners in the setting and informed by
EYFS materials, the Early Years Outcomes guidance and Early Support resources
(information is available at the National Children’s Bureau website – see the
References section under Chapter 5 for the link).
5.46 Where a child has an EHC plan, the local authority must review that plan as a
minimum every twelve months. As part of the review, the local authority can ask
settings, and require maintained nursery schools, to convene and hold the annual
review meeting on its behalf. Further information about EHC plan reviews and the
role of early years settings is in Chapter 9, Education, Health and Care needs
assessments and plans.
87

===== PAGE 88 =====
Transition
5.47 SEN support should include planning and preparing for transition, before a child
moves into another setting or school. This can also include a review of the SEN
support being provided or the EHC plan. To support the transition, information
should be shared by the current setting with the receiving setting or school. The
current setting should agree with parents the information to be shared as part of this
planning process
Involving specialists
5.48 Where a child continues to make less than expected progress, despite evidence-
based support and interventions that are matched to the child’s area of need,
practitioners should consider involving appropriate specialists, for example, health
visitors, speech and language therapists, Portage workers, educational
psychologists or specialist teachers, who may be able to identify effective strategies,
equipment, programmes or other interventions to enable the child to make progress
towards the desired learning and development outcomes. The decision to involve
specialists should be taken with the child’s parents.
Requesting an Education, Health and Care needs assessment
5.49 Where, despite the setting having taken relevant and purposeful action to identify,
assess and meet the special educational needs of the child, the child has not made
expected progress, the setting should consider requesting an Education, Health and
Care needs assessment (see Chapter 9, Education, Health and Care needs
assessments and plans).
Record keeping
5.50 Practitioners must maintain a record of children under their care as required under
the EYFS framework. Such records about their children must be available to parents
and they must include how the setting supports children with SEN and disabilities.
Keeping provision under review
5.51 Providers should review how well equipped they are to provide support across the
four broad areas of SEN. Information on these areas is collected through the Early
Years Census, and forms part of the statutory publication ‘Children and Young
People with SEN: an analysis’ which is issued by DfE each year.
The role of the SENCO in early years provision
5.52 A maintained nursery school must ensure that there is a qualified teacher
designated as the SENCO in order to ensure the detailed implementation of support
88

===== PAGE 89 =====
for children with SEN. This individual should also have the prescribed qualification
for SEN Co-ordination or relevant experience.
5.53 The EYFS framework requires other early years providers to have arrangements in
place for meeting children’s SEN. Those in group provision are expected to identify a
SENCO. Childminders are encouraged to identify a person to act as SENCO and
childminders who are registered with a childminder agency or who are part of a
network may wish to share that role between them.
5.54 The role of the SENCO involves:
• ensuring all practitioners in the setting understand their responsibilities to
children with SEN and the setting’s approach to identifying and meeting
SEN
• advising and supporting colleagues
• ensuring parents are closely involved throughout and that their insights
inform action taken by the setting, and
• liaising with professionals or agencies beyond the setting
The role of the Area SENCO
5.55 To fulfil their role in identifying and planning for the needs of children with SEN, local
authorities should ensure that there is sufficient expertise and experience amongst
local early years providers to support children with SEN. Local authorities often make
use of Area SENCOs to provide advice and guidance to early years providers on the
development of inclusive early learning environments. The Area SENCO helps make
the links between education, health and social care to facilitate appropriate early
provision for children with SEN and their transition to compulsory schooling.
5.56 Typically, the role of the Area SENCO includes:
• providing advice and practical support to early years providers about
approaches to identification, assessment and intervention within the SEN
Code of Practice
• providing day-to-day support for setting-based SENCOs in ensuring
arrangements are in place to support children with SEN
• strengthening the links between the settings, parents, schools, social care
and health services
• developing and disseminating good practice
89

===== PAGE 90 =====
• supporting the development and delivery of training both for individual
settings and on a wider basis
• developing links with existing SENCO networks to support smooth
transitions to school nursery and reception classes, and
• informing parents of and working with local impartial Information, Advice
and Support Services, to promote effective work with parents of children in
the early years
5.57 The Area SENCO plays an important part in planning for children with SEN to
transfer between early years provision and schools.
5.58 Where there is an Area SENCO in place, they will want to work with early years
providers who are registered with either Ofsted or a childminder agency. They
should consider how they work with and provide advice to childminder agencies and
their registered providers in supporting children with SEN.
Funding for SEN support in the early years
5.59 Local authorities must ensure that all providers delivering funded early education
places meet the needs of children with SEN and disabled children. In order to do this
local authorities should make sure funding arrangements for early education reflect
the need to provide suitable support for these children.
5.60 Early years providers should consider how best to use their resources to support the
progress of children with SEN.
90

===== PAGE 91 =====
6 Schools
What this chapter covers
This chapter applies mostly to mainstream schools. The Equality Act duties
described under ‘Equality and inclusion’ and the duty to publish an SEN information
report under ‘Publishing information: SEN information report’ apply to special
schools, as do schools’ duties in respect of EHC needs assessments and plans
(Chapter 9 – Education, Health and Care needs assessments and plans). The
chapter explains the action that mainstream schools should take to meet their duties
in relation to identifying and supporting all children with special educational needs
(SEN) whether or not they have an Education, Health and Care (EHC) plan.
Relevant legislation
Primary
The following sections of the Children and Families Act 2014:
• Co-operating generally: governing body functions: Section 29
• Children and young people with special educational needs but no EHC
plan: Section 29
• Children with SEN in maintained nurseries and mainstream schools:
Section 35
• Using best endeavours to secure special educational provision: Section 66
• SEN co-ordinators: Section 67
• Informing parents and young people: Section 68
• SEN information report: Section 69
• Duty to support pupils with medical conditions: Section 100
The Equality Act 2010
Regulations
The Special Educational Needs and Disability Regulations 2014
91

===== PAGE 92 =====
Improving outcomes: high aspirations and expectations
for children and young people with SEN
6.1 All children and young people are entitled to an appropriate education, one that is
appropriate to their needs, promotes high standards and the fulfilment of potential.
This should enable them to:
• achieve their best
• become confident individuals living fulfilling lives, and
• make a successful transition into adulthood, whether into employment,
further or higher education or training
6.2 Every school is required to identify and address the SEN of the pupils that they
support. Mainstream schools, which in this chapter includes maintained schools and
academies that are not special schools, maintained nursery schools, 16 to19
academies, alternative provision academies and Pupil Referral Units (PRUs), must:
• use their best endeavours to make sure that a child with SEN gets the
support they need – this means doing everything they can to meet children
and young people’s SEN
• ensure that children and young people with SEN engage in the activities of
the school alongside pupils who do not have SEN
• designate a teacher to be responsible for co-ordinating SEN provision – the
SEN co-ordinator, or SENCO (this does not apply to 16 to 19 academies)
• inform parents when they are making special educational provision for a
child
• prepare an SEN information report (see ‘Publishing information: SEN
information report’, paragraph 6.78 onwards) and their arrangements for
the admission of disabled children, the steps being taken to prevent
disabled children from being treated less favourably than others, the
facilities provided to enable access to the school for disabled children and
their accessibility plan showing how they plan to improve access
progressively over time
6.3 There should be a member of the governing body or a sub-committee with specific
oversight of the school’s arrangements for SEN and disability. School leaders should
regularly review how expertise and resources used to address SEN can be used to
build the quality of whole-school provision as part of their approach to school
improvement.
92

===== PAGE 93 =====
6.4 The quality of teaching for pupils with SEN, and the progress made by pupils, should
be a core part of the school’s performance management arrangements and its
approach to professional development for all teaching and support staff. School
leaders and teaching staff, including the SENCO, should identify any patterns in the
identification of SEN, both within the school and in comparison with national data,
and use these to reflect on and reinforce the quality of teaching. Many aspects of this
whole school approach have been piloted by Achievement for All – for further details
and links to other sources of training and support materials, see Annex 2: Improving
practice and staff training in education settings.
6.5 The identification of SEN should be built into the overall approach to monitoring the
progress and development of all pupils.
6.6 A mainstream school’s arrangements for assessing and identifying pupils as having
SEN should be agreed and set out as part of the Local Offer. A school should
publish its arrangements as part of the information it makes available on SEN (see
the Special Educational Needs and Disability Regulations 2014).
6.7 In fulfilling these duties schools should have regard to the principles set out in
Chapter 1. In particular, they should ensure that children, parents and young people
are actively involved in decision-making throughout the approaches set out in this
chapter.
Equality and inclusion
6.8 Schools support pupils with a wide range of SEN. They should regularly review and
evaluate the breadth and impact of the support they offer or can access. Schools
must co-operate with the local authority in reviewing the provision that is available
locally (Chapter 3) and in developing the Local Offer (Chapter 4). Schools should
also collaborate with other local education providers to explore how different needs
can be met most effectively. They must have due regard to general duties to
promote disability equality.
6.9 All schools have duties under the Equality Act 2010 towards individual disabled
children and young people. They must make reasonable adjustments, including the
provision of auxiliary aids and services for disabled children, to prevent them being
put at a substantial disadvantage. These duties are anticipatory – they require
thought to be given in advance to what disabled children and young people might
require and what adjustments might need to be made to prevent that disadvantage.
Schools also have wider duties to prevent discrimination, to promote equality of
opportunity and to foster good relations.
93

===== PAGE 94 =====
6.10 Further duties are referred to in the Introduction. The guidance in this chapter should
be read in the light of the principle in Chapter 1 which focuses on inclusive practice
and removing barriers to learning.
Medical conditions
6.11 The Children and Families Act 2014 places a duty on maintained schools and
academies to make arrangements to support pupils with medical conditions.
Individual healthcare plans will normally specify the type and level of support
required to meet the medical needs of such pupils. Where children and young people
also have SEN, their provision should be planned and delivered in a co-ordinated
way with the healthcare plan. Schools are required to have regard to statutory
guidance ‘Supporting pupils at school with medical conditions’ (see the References
section under Introduction for a link).
Curriculum
6.12 All pupils should have access to a broad and balanced curriculum. The National
Curriculum Inclusion Statement states that teachers should set high expectations for
every pupil, whatever their prior attainment. Teachers should use appropriate
assessment to set targets which are deliberately ambitious. Potential areas of
difficulty should be identified and addressed at the outset. Lessons should be
planned to address potential areas of difficulty and to remove barriers to pupil
achievement. In many cases, such planning will mean that pupils with SEN and
disabilities will be able to study the full national curriculum.
Careers guidance for children and young people
6.13 Maintained schools and PRUs must ensure that pupils from Year 8 until Year 13 are
provided with independent careers guidance. Academies are subject to this duty
through their funding agreements. Chapter 8 provides more information about
careers guidance for children and young people.
Identifying SEN in schools
6.14 All schools should have a clear approach to identifying and responding to SEN. The
benefits of early identification are widely recognised – identifying need at the earliest
point and then making effective provision improves long-term outcomes for the child
or young person.
6.15 A pupil has SEN where their learning difficulty or disability calls for special
educational provision, namely provision different from or additional to that normally
available to pupils of the same age. Making higher quality teaching normally
available to the whole class is likely to mean that fewer pupils will require such
94

===== PAGE 95 =====
support. Such improvements in whole-class provision tend to be more cost effective
and sustainable.
6.16 Schools should assess each pupil’s current skills and levels of attainment on entry,
building on information from previous settings and key stages where appropriate. At
the same time, schools should consider evidence that a pupil may have a disability
under the Equality Act 2010 and, if so, what reasonable adjustments may need to be
made for them.
6.17 Class and subject teachers, supported by the senior leadership team, should make
regular assessments of progress for all pupils. These should seek to identify pupils
making less than expected progress given their age and individual circumstances.
This can be characterised by progress which:
• is significantly slower than that of their peers starting from the same
baseline
• fails to match or better the child’s previous rate of progress
• fails to close the attainment gap between the child and their peers
• widens the attainment gap
6.18 It can include progress in areas other than attainment – for instance where a pupil
needs to make additional progress with wider development or social needs in order
to make a successful transition to adult life.
6.19 The first response to such progress should be high quality teaching targeted at their
areas of weakness. Where progress continues to be less than expected the class or
subject teacher, working with the SENCO, should assess whether the child has SEN.
While informally gathering evidence (including the views of the pupil and their
parents) schools should not delay in putting in place extra teaching or other rigorous
interventions designed to secure better progress, where required. The pupil’s
response to such support can help identify their particular needs.
6.20 For some children, SEN can be identified at an early age. However, for other
children and young people difficulties become evident only as they develop. All those
who work with children and young people should be alert to emerging difficulties and
respond early. In particular, parents know their children best and it is important that
all professionals listen and understand when parents express concerns about their
child’s development. They should also listen to and address any concerns raised by
children and young people themselves.
95

===== PAGE 96 =====
6.21 Persistent disruptive or withdrawn behaviours do not necessarily mean that a child or
young person has SEN. Where there are concerns, there should be an assessment
to determine whether there are any causal factors such as undiagnosed learning
difficulties, difficulties with communication or mental health issues. If it is thought
housing, family or other domestic circumstances may be contributing to the
presenting behaviour a multi-agency approach, supported by the use of approaches
such as the Early Help Assessment, may be appropriate. In all cases, early
identification and intervention can significantly reduce the use of more costly
intervention at a later stage.
6.22 Professionals should also be alert to other events that can lead to learning difficulties
or wider mental health difficulties, such as bullying or bereavement. Such events will
not always lead to children having SEN but it can have an impact on wellbeing and
sometimes this can be severe. Schools should ensure they make appropriate
provision for a child’s short-term needs in order to prevent problems escalating.
Where there are long-lasting difficulties schools should consider whether the child
might have SEN. Further guidance on dealing with bullying issues can be found on
the GOV.UK website – a link is given in the References section under Chapter 6.
6.23 Slow progress and low attainment do not necessarily mean that a child has SEN and
should not automatically lead to a pupil being recorded as having SEN. However,
they may be an indicator of a range of learning difficulties or disabilities. Equally, it
should not be assumed that attainment in line with chronological age means that
there is no learning difficulty or disability. Some learning difficulties and disabilities
occur across the range of cognitive ability and, left unaddressed may lead to
frustration, which may manifest itself as disaffection, emotional or behavioural
difficulties.
6.24 Identifying and assessing SEN for children or young people whose first language is
not English requires particular care. Schools should look carefully at all aspects of a
child or young person’s performance in different areas of learning and development
or subjects to establish whether lack of progress is due to limitations in their
command of English or if it arises from SEN or a disability. Difficulties related solely
to limitations in English as an additional language are not SEN.
6.25 When reviewing and managing special educational provision the broad areas of
need and support outlined from 6.28 below may be helpful, and schools should
review how well equipped they are to provide support across these areas.
Information on these areas of need and support is also collected through the School
Census and forms part of the statutory publication ‘Children and Young People with
SEN: an analysis’ which is issued by DfE each year.
96

===== PAGE 97 =====
6.26 There is a wide range of information available on appropriate interventions for pupils
with different types of need, and associated training which schools can use to ensure
they have the necessary knowledge and expertise to use them. See the References
section under Chapter 6 for links to organisations that provide this information.
6.27 These four broad areas give an overview of the range of needs that should be
planned for. The purpose of identification is to work out what action the school needs
to take, not to fit a pupil into a category. In practice, individual children or young
people often have needs that cut across all these areas and their needs may change
over time. For instance speech, language and communication needs can also be a
feature of a number of other areas of SEN, and children and young people with an
Autistic Spectrum Disorder (ASD) may have needs across all areas, including
particular sensory requirements. A detailed assessment of need should ensure that
the full range of an individual’s needs is identified, not simply the primary need. The
support provided to an individual should always be based on a full understanding of
their particular strengths and needs and seek to address them all using well-
evidenced interventions targeted at their areas of difficulty and where necessary
specialist equipment or software.
Broad areas of need
Communication and interaction
6.28 Children and young people with speech, language and communication needs
(SLCN) have difficulty in communicating with others. This may be because they have
difficulty saying what they want to, understanding what is being said to them or they
do not understand or use social rules of communication. The profile for every child
with SLCN is different and their needs may change over time. They may have
difficulty with one, some or all of the different aspects of speech, language or social
communication at different times of their lives.
6.29 Children and young people with ASD, including Asperger’s Syndrome and Autism,
are likely to have particular difficulties with social interaction. They may also
experience difficulties with language, communication and imagination, which can
impact on how they relate to others.
Cognition and learning
6.30 Support for learning difficulties may be required when children and young people
learn at a slower pace than their peers, even with appropriate differentiation.
Learning difficulties cover a wide range of needs, including moderate learning
difficulties (MLD), severe learning difficulties (SLD), where children are likely to need
support in all areas of the curriculum and associated difficulties with mobility and
communication, through to profound and multiple learning difficulties (PMLD), where
97

===== PAGE 98 =====
children are likely to have severe and complex learning difficulties as well as a
physical disability or sensory impairment.
6.31 Specific learning difficulties (SpLD), affect one or more specific aspects of learning.
This encompasses a range of conditions such as dyslexia, dyscalculia and
dyspraxia.
Social, emotional and mental health difficulties
6.32 Children and young people may experience a wide range of social and emotional
difficulties which manifest themselves in many ways. These may include becoming
withdrawn or isolated, as well as displaying challenging, disruptive or disturbing
behaviour. These behaviours may reflect underlying mental health difficulties such
as anxiety or depression, self-harming, substance misuse, eating disorders or
physical symptoms that are medically unexplained. Other children and young people
may have disorders such as attention deficit disorder, attention deficit hyperactive
disorder or attachment disorder.
6.33 Schools and colleges should have clear processes to support children and young
people, including how they will manage the effect of any disruptive behaviour so it
does not adversely affect other pupils. The Department for Education publishes
guidance on managing pupils’ mental health and behaviour difficulties in schools –
see the References section under Chapter 6 for a link.
Sensory and/or physical needs
6.34 Some children and young people require special educational provision because they
have a disability which prevents or hinders them from making use of the educational
facilities generally provided. These difficulties can be age related and may fluctuate
over time. Many children and young people with vision impairment (VI), hearing
impairment (HI) or a multi-sensory impairment (MSI) will require specialist support
and/or equipment to access their learning, or habilitation support. Children and
young people with an MSI have a combination of vision and hearing difficulties.
Information on how to provide services for deafblind children and young people is
available through the Social Care for Deafblind Children and Adults guidance
published by the Department of Health (see the References section under Chapter 6
for a link).
6.35 Some children and young people with a physical disability (PD) require additional
ongoing support and equipment to access all the opportunities available to their
peers.
98

===== PAGE 99 =====
Special educational provision in schools
6.36 Teachers are responsible and accountable for the progress and development of the
pupils in their class, including where pupils access support from teaching assistants
or specialist staff.
6.37 High quality teaching, differentiated for individual pupils, is the first step in
responding to pupils who have or may have SEN. Additional intervention and support
cannot compensate for a lack of good quality teaching. Schools should regularly and
carefully review the quality of teaching for all pupils, including those at risk of
underachievement. This includes reviewing and, where necessary, improving,
teachers’ understanding of strategies to identify and support vulnerable pupils and
their knowledge of the SEN most frequently encountered.
6.38 In deciding whether to make special educational provision, the teacher and SENCO
should consider all of the information gathered from within the school about the
pupil’s progress, alongside national data and expectations of progress. This should
include high quality and accurate formative assessment, using effective tools and
early assessment materials. For higher levels of need, schools should have
arrangements in place to draw on more specialised assessments from external
agencies and professionals.
6.39 This information gathering should include an early discussion with the pupil and their
parents. These early discussions with parents should be structured in such a way
that they develop a good understanding of the pupil’s areas of strength and difficulty,
the parents’ concerns, the agreed outcomes sought for the child and the next steps.
A short note of these early discussions should be added to the pupil’s record on the
school information system and given to the parents. Schools should also tell
children, parents and young people about the local authority’s Information, Advice
and Support Service.
6.40 Consideration of whether special educational provision is required should start with
the desired outcomes, including the expected progress and attainment and the views
and wishes of the pupil and their parents. This should then help determine the
support that is needed and whether it can be provided by adapting the school’s core
offer or whether something different or additional is required.
6.41 More detailed information on what constitutes good outcome setting is given in
Chapter 9, Education, Health and Care needs assessments and plans (paragraphs
9.64 to 9.69). These principles should be applied to planning for all children and
young people with SEN. From Year 9 onwards, the nature of the outcomes will
reflect the need to ensure young people are preparing for adulthood.
99

===== PAGE 100 =====
6.42 The outcomes considered should include those needed to make successful
transitions between phases of education and to prepare for adult life. Schools should
engage with secondary schools or FE providers as necessary to help plan for these
transitions (see Chapter 8, Preparing for adulthood from the earliest years). The
agreed actions may also include those taken to make sure the school meets its duty
to ensure that pupils with SEN engage in school activities together with those who do
not have SEN.
6.43 However support is provided, a clear date for reviewing progress should be agreed
and the parent, pupil and teaching staff should each be clear about how they will
help the pupil reach the expected outcomes. The overriding purpose of this early
action is to help the pupil achieve the identified outcomes and remove any barriers to
learning. Where it is decided that a pupil does have SEN, the decision should be
recorded in the school records and the pupil’s parents must be formally informed
that special educational provision is being made. Arrangements for appropriate
support should be made through the school’s approach to SEN support.
SEN support in schools
6.44 Where a pupil is identified as having SEN, schools should take action to remove
barriers to learning and put effective special educational provision in place. This SEN
support should take the form of a four-part cycle through which earlier decisions and
actions are revisited, refined and revised with a growing understanding of the pupil’s
needs and of what supports the pupil in making good progress and securing good
outcomes. This is known as the graduated approach. It draws on more detailed
approaches, more frequent review and more specialist expertise in successive
cycles in order to match interventions to the SEN of children and young people.
Assess
6.45 In identifying a child as needing SEN support the class or subject teacher, working
with the SENCO, should carry out a clear analysis of the pupil’s needs. This should
draw on the teacher’s assessment and experience of the pupil, their previous
progress and attainment, as well as information from the school’s core approach to
pupil progress, attainment, and behaviour. It should also draw on other subject
teachers’ assessments where relevant, the individual’s development in comparison
to their peers and national data, the views and experience of parents, the pupil’s own
views and, if relevant, advice from external support services. Schools should take
seriously any concerns raised by a parent. These should be recorded and compared
to the setting’s own assessment and information on how the pupil is developing.
6.46 This assessment should be reviewed regularly. This will help ensure that support
and intervention are matched to need, barriers to learning are identified and
overcome, and that a clear picture of the interventions put in place and their effect is
100

===== PAGE 101 =====
developed. For some types of SEN, the way in which a pupil responds to an
intervention can be the most reliable method of developing a more accurate picture
of need.
6.47 In some cases, outside professionals from health or social services may already be
involved with the child. These professionals should liaise with the school to help
inform the assessments. Where professionals are not already working with school
staff the SENCO should contact them if the parents agree.
Plan
6.48 Where it is decided to provide a pupil with SEN support, the parents must be
formally notified, although parents should have already been involved in forming the
assessment of needs as outlined above. The teacher and the SENCO should agree
in consultation with the parent and the pupil the adjustments, interventions and
support to be put in place, as well as the expected impact on progress, development
or behaviour, along with a clear date for review.
6.49 All teachers and support staff who work with the pupil should be made aware of their
needs, the outcomes sought, the support provided and any teaching strategies or
approaches that are required. This should also be recorded on the school’s
information system.
6.50 The support and intervention provided should be selected to meet the outcomes
identified for the pupil, based on reliable evidence of effectiveness, and should be
provided by staff with sufficient skills and knowledge.
6.51 Parents should be fully aware of the planned support and interventions and, where
appropriate, plans should seek parental involvement to reinforce or contribute to
progress at home. The information set out in 6.39 should be readily available to and
discussed with the pupil’s parents.
Do
6.52 The class or subject teacher should remain responsible for working with the child on
a daily basis. Where the interventions involve group or one-to-one teaching away
from the main class or subject teacher, they should still retain responsibility for the
pupil. They should work closely with any teaching assistants or specialist staff
involved, to plan and assess the impact of support and interventions and how they
can be linked to classroom teaching. The SENCO should support the class or
subject teacher in the further assessment of the child’s particular strengths and
weaknesses, in problem solving and advising on the effective implementation of
support.
101

===== PAGE 102 =====
Review
6.53 The effectiveness of the support and interventions and their impact on the pupil’s
progress should be reviewed in line with the agreed date.
6.54 The impact and quality of the support and interventions should be evaluated, along
with the views of the pupil and their parents. This should feed back into the analysis
of the pupil’s needs. The class or subject teacher, working with the SENCO, should
revise the support in light of the pupil’s progress and development, deciding on any
changes to the support and outcomes in consultation with the parent and pupil.
6.55 Parents should have clear information about the impact of the support and
interventions provided, enabling them to be involved in planning next steps.
6.56 Where a pupil has an EHC plan, the local authority must review that plan as a
minimum every twelve months. Schools must co-operate with the local authority in
the review process and, as part of the review, the local authority can require schools
to convene and hold annual review meetings on its behalf. Further information about
EHC plan reviews is given in Chapter 9, Education, Health and Care needs
assessments and plans.
Transition
6.57 SEN support should include planning and preparation for the transitions between
phases of education and preparation for adult life (see Chapter 8, Preparing for
adulthood from the earliest years). To support transition, the school should share
information with the school, college or other setting the child or young person is
moving to. Schools should agree with parents and pupils the information to be
shared as part of this planning process. Where a pupil is remaining at the school for
post-16 provision, this planning and preparation should include consideration of how
to provide a high quality study programme, as set out in paragraph 8.32.
Involving specialists
6.58 Where a pupil continues to make less than expected progress, despite evidence-
based support and interventions that are matched to the pupil’s area of need, the
school should consider involving specialists, including those secured by the school
itself or from outside agencies.
6.59 Schools may involve specialists at any point to advise them on early identification of
SEN and effective support and interventions. A school should always involve a
specialist where a pupil continues to make little or no progress or where they
continue to work at levels substantially below those expected of pupils of a similar
age despite evidence-based SEN support delivered by appropriately trained staff.
The pupil’s parents should always be involved in any decision to involve specialists.
102

===== PAGE 103 =====
The involvement of specialists and what was discussed or agreed should be
recorded and shared with the parents and teaching staff supporting the child in the
same way as other SEN support.
6.60 Where assessment indicates that support from specialist services is required, it is
important that children and young people receive it as quickly as possible. Joint
commissioning arrangements should seek to ensure that there are sufficient services
to meet the likely need in an area. The Local Offer should set out clearly what
support is available from different services and how it may be accessed.
6.61 Schools should work closely with the local authority and other providers to agree the
range of local services and clear arrangements for making appropriate requests.
This might include schools commissioning specialist services directly. Such
specialist services include, but are not limited to:
• educational psychologists
• Child and Adolescent Mental Health Services (CAMHS)
• specialist teachers or support services, including specialist teachers with a
mandatory qualification for children with hearing and vision impairment ,
including multi-sensory impairment, and for those with a physical disability.
(Those teaching classes of children with sensory impairment must hold an
appropriate qualification approved by the Secretary of State. Teachers
working in an advisory role to support such pupils should also hold the
appropriate qualification.)
• therapists (including speech and language therapists, occupational therapists
and physiotherapists)
6.62 The SENCO and class teacher, together with the specialists, and involving the
pupil’s parents, should consider a range of evidence-based and effective teaching
approaches, appropriate equipment, strategies and interventions in order to support
the child’s progress. They should agree the outcomes to be achieved through the
support, including a date by which progress will be reviewed.
Requesting an Education, Health and Care needs assessment
6.63 SEN support should be adapted or replaced depending on how effective it has been
in achieving the agreed outcomes. Where, despite the school having taken relevant
and purposeful action to identify, assess and meet the SEN of the child or young
person, the child or young person has not made expected progress, the school or
parents should consider requesting an Education, Health and Care needs
103

===== PAGE 104 =====
assessment (see Chapter 9). To inform its decision the local authority will expect to
see evidence of the action taken by the school as part of SEN support.
Involving parents and pupils in planning and reviewing progress
6.64 Schools must provide an annual report for parents on their child’s progress. Most
schools will want to go beyond this and provide regular reports for parents on how
their child is progressing.
6.65 Where a pupil is receiving SEN support, schools should talk to parents regularly to
set clear outcomes and review progress towards them, discuss the activities and
support that will help achieve them, and identify the responsibilities of the parent, the
pupil and the school. Schools should meet parents at least three times each year.
6.66 These discussions can build confidence in the actions being taken by the school, but
they can also strengthen the impact of SEN support by increasing parental
engagement in the approaches and teaching strategies that are being used. Finally,
they can provide essential information on the impact of SEN support outside school
and any changes in the pupil’s needs.
6.67 These discussions should be led by a teacher with good knowledge and
understanding of the pupil who is aware of their needs and attainment. This will
usually be the class teacher or form tutor, supported by the SENCO. It should
provide an opportunity for the parent to share their concerns and, together with the
teacher, agree their aspirations for the pupil.
6.68 Conducting these discussions effectively involves a considerable amount of skill. As
with other aspects of good teaching for pupils with SEN, schools should ensure that
teaching staff are supported to manage these conversations as part of professional
development.
6.69 These discussions will need to allow sufficient time to explore the parents’ views and
to plan effectively. Meetings should, wherever possible, be aligned with the normal
cycle of discussions with parents of all pupils. They will, however, be longer than
most parent-teacher meetings.
6.70 The views of the pupil should be included in these discussions. This could be
through involving the pupil in all or part of the discussion itself, or gathering their
views as part of the preparation.
6.71 A record of the outcomes, action and support agreed through the discussion should
be kept and shared with all the appropriate school staff. This record should be given
to the pupil’s parents. The school’s management information system should be
updated as appropriate.
104

===== PAGE 105 =====
Use of data and record keeping
6.72 It is for schools to determine their own approach to record keeping in line with the
requirements of the Data Protection Act 1998. The provision made for pupils with
SEN should be recorded accurately and kept up to date. As part of any inspection,
Ofsted will expect to see evidence of pupil progress, a focus on outcomes and a
rigorous approach to the monitoring and evaluation of any SEN support provided.
Ofsted publish more detail about their expectations in their inspection guidelines.
6.73 Schools should particularly record details of additional or different provision made
under SEN support. This should form part of regular discussions with parents about
the child’s progress, expected outcomes from the support and planned next steps.
They should ensure that they have accurate information to evidence the SEN
support that has been provided over the pupil’s time in the school, as well as its
impact. A local authority that is considering or is carrying out an assessment of the
pupil’s needs will wish to review such information (see Chapter 9). For children and
young people detained in custody, a Youth Offending Team will seek information
from the school to support their initial assessments. The school should respond to
such requests as soon as possible (see Chapter 10).
6.74 Schools use information systems to monitor the progress and development of all
pupils. Details of SEN, outcomes, teaching strategies and the involvement of
specialists should be recorded as part of this overall approach.
6.75 As outlined in ‘Involving parents and pupils in planning and reviewing progress’ from
paragraph 6.63 above, the school should readily share this information with parents.
It should be provided in a format that is accessible (for example, a note setting out
the areas of discussion following a regular SEN support meeting or tracking data
showing the pupil’s progress together with highlighted sections of a provision map
that enables parents to see the support that has been provided).
6.76 Provision maps are an efficient way of showing all the provision that the school
makes which is additional to and different from that which is offered through the
school’s curriculum. The use of provision maps can help SENCOs to maintain an
overview of the programmes and interventions used with different groups of pupils
and provide a basis for monitoring the levels of intervention.
6.77 Provision management can be used strategically to develop special educational
provision to match the assessed needs of pupils across the school, and to evaluate
the impact of that provision on pupil progress. Used in this way provision
management can also contribute to school improvement by identifying particular
patterns of need and potential areas of development for teaching staff. It can help
the school to develop the use of interventions that are effective and to remove those
105

===== PAGE 106 =====
that are less so. It can support schools to improve their core offer for all pupils as the
most effective approaches are adopted more widely across the school.
6.78 The Department for Education publishes a helpful range of further information and
resources about provision mapping (see the References section under Chapter 6 for
a link).
Publishing information: SEN information report
6.79 The governing bodies of maintained schools and maintained nursery schools and the
proprietors of academy schools must publish information on their websites about the
implementation of the governing body’s or the proprietor’s policy for pupils with SEN.
The information published should be updated annually and any changes to the
information occurring during the year should be updated as soon as possible. The
information required is set out in the Special Educational Needs and Disability
Regulations 2014 and must include information about:
• the kinds of SEN that are provided for
• policies for identifying children and young people with SEN and assessing
their needs, including the name and contact details of the SENCO
(mainstream schools)
• arrangements for consulting parents of children with SEN and involving
them in their child’s education
• arrangements for consulting young people with SEN and involving them in
their education
• arrangements for assessing and reviewing children and young people’s
progress towards outcomes. This should include the opportunities available
to work with parents and young people as part of this assessment and
review
• arrangements for supporting children and young people in moving between
phases of education and in preparing for adulthood. As young people
prepare for adulthood outcomes should reflect their ambitions, which could
include higher education, employment, independent living and participation
in society
• the approach to teaching children and young people with SEN
• how adaptations are made to the curriculum and the learning environment
of children and young people with SEN
106

===== PAGE 107 =====
• the expertise and training of staff to support children and young people with
SEN, including how specialist expertise will be secured
• evaluating the effectiveness of the provision made for children and young
people with SEN
• how children and young people with SEN are enabled to engage in
activities available with children and young people in the school who do not
have SEN
• support for improving emotional and social development. This should
include extra pastoral support arrangements for listening to the views of
children and young people with SEN and measures to prevent bullying
• how the school involves other bodies, including health and social care
bodies, local authority support services and voluntary sector organisations,
in meeting children and young people’s SEN and supporting their families
• arrangements for handling complaints from parents of children with SEN
about the provision made at the school
6.80 The above should include arrangements for supporting children and young people
who are looked after by the local authority and have SEN.
6.81 Schools should ensure that the information is easily accessible by young people and
parents and is set out in clear, straightforward language. It should include
information on the school’s SEN policy and named contacts within the school for
situations where young people or parents have concerns. It should also give details
of the school’s contribution to the Local Offer and must include information on where
the local authority’s Local Offer is published.
6.82 In setting out details of the broad and balanced curriculum provided in each year,
schools should include details of how the curriculum is adapted or made accessible
for pupils with SEN.
6.83 Schools should also make data on the levels and types of need within the school
available to the local authority. This data will be required to inform local strategic
planning of SEN support, and to enable the local authority to identify pupils who have
or may have SEN. Such data, collected through the School Census, is also required
to produce the national SEN information report.
107

===== PAGE 108 =====
The role of the SENCO in schools
6.84 Governing bodies of maintained mainstream schools and the proprietors of
mainstream academy schools (including free schools) must ensure that there is a
qualified teacher designated as SENCO for the school.
6.85 The SENCO must be a qualified teacher working at the school. A newly appointed
SENCO must be a qualified teacher and, where they have not previously been the
SENCO at that or any other relevant school for a total period of more than twelve
months, they must achieve a National Award in Special Educational Needs Co-
ordination within three years of appointment.
6.86 A National Award must be a postgraduate course accredited by a recognised higher
education provider. The National College for Teaching and Leadership has worked
with providers to develop a set of learning outcomes (see the References section
under Chapter 6 for a link). When appointing staff or arranging for them to study for a
National Award schools should satisfy themselves that the chosen course will meet
these outcomes and equip the SENCO to fulfil the duties outlined in this Code. Any
selected course should be at least equivalent to 60 credits at postgraduate study.
6.87 The SENCO has an important role to play with the headteacher and governing body,
in determining the strategic development of SEN policy and provision in the school.
They will be most effective in that role if they are part of the school leadership team.
6.88 The SENCO has day-to-day responsibility for the operation of SEN policy and co-
ordination of specific provision made to support individual pupils with SEN, including
those who have EHC plans.
6.89 The SENCO provides professional guidance to colleagues and will work closely with
staff, parents and other agencies. The SENCO should be aware of the provision in
the Local Offer and be able to work with professionals providing a support role to
families to ensure that pupils with SEN receive appropriate support and high quality
teaching.
6.90 The key responsibilities of the SENCO may include:
• overseeing the day-to-day operation of the school’s SEN policy
• co-ordinating provision for children with SEN
• liaising with the relevant Designated Teacher where a looked after pupil
has SEN
• advising on the graduated approach to providing SEN support
108

===== PAGE 109 =====
• advising on the deployment of the school’s delegated budget and other
resources to meet pupils’ needs effectively
• liaising with parents of pupils with SEN
• liaising with early years providers, other schools, educational psychologists,
health and social care professionals, and independent or voluntary bodies
• being a key point of contact with external agencies, especially the local
authority and its support services
• liaising with potential next providers of education to ensure a pupil and their
parents are informed about options and a smooth transition is planned
• working with the headteacher and school governors to ensure that the
school meets its responsibilities under the Equality Act (2010) with regard
to reasonable adjustments and access arrangements
• ensuring that the school keeps the records of all pupils with SEN up to date
6.91 The school should ensure that the SENCO has sufficient time and resources to carry
out these functions. This should include providing the SENCO with sufficient
administrative support and time away from teaching to enable them to fulfil their
responsibilities in a similar way to other important strategic roles within a school.
6.92 It may be appropriate for a number of smaller primary schools to share a SENCO
employed to work across the individual schools, where they meet the other
requirements set out in this chapter of the Code. Schools can consider this
arrangement where it secures sufficient time away from teaching and sufficient
administrative support to enable the SENCO to fulfil the role effectively for the total
registered pupil population across all of the schools involved.
6.93 Where such a shared approach is taken the SENCO should not normally have a
significant class teaching commitment. Such a shared SENCO role should not be
carried out by a headteacher at one of the schools.
6.94 Schools should review the effectiveness of such a shared SENCO role regularly and
should not persist with it where there is evidence of a negative impact on the quality
of SEN provision, or the progress of pupils with SEN.
Funding for SEN support
6.95 All mainstream schools are provided with resources to support those with additional
needs, including pupils with SEN and disabilities. Most of these resources are
determined by a local funding formula, discussed with the local schools forum, which
109

===== PAGE 110 =====
is also applied to local academies. School and academy sixth forms receive an
allocation based on a national funding formula.
6.96 Schools have an amount identified within their overall budget, called the notional
SEN budget. This is not a ring-fenced amount, and it is for the school to provide high
quality appropriate support from the whole of its budget.
6.97 It is for schools, as part of their normal budget planning, to determine their approach
to using their resources to support the progress of pupils with SEN. The SENCO,
headteacher and governing body or proprietor should establish a clear picture of the
resources that are available to the school. They should consider their strategic
approach to meeting SEN in the context of the total resources available, including
any resources targeted at particular groups, such as the pupil premium.
6.98 This will enable schools to provide a clear description of the types of special
educational provision they normally provide and will help parents and others to
understand what they can normally expect the school to provide for pupils with SEN.
6.99 Schools are not expected to meet the full costs of more expensive special
educational provision from their core funding. They are expected to provide
additional support which costs up to a nationally prescribed threshold per pupil per
year. The responsible local authority, usually the authority where the child or young
person lives, should provide additional top-up funding where the cost of the special
educational provision required to meet the needs of an individual pupil exceeds the
nationally prescribed threshold.
110

===== PAGE 111 =====
7 Further education
What this chapter covers
This chapter explains and provides guidance on the statutory duties on further
education colleges, sixth form colleges, 16-19 academies and some independent
specialist colleges approved under Section 41 of the Children and Families Act 2014
to identify, assess and provide support for young people with special educational
needs (SEN).
Relevant legislation
Primary
The following sections of the Children and Families Act 2014:
• Co-operating generally: local authority functions: Section 28
• Co-operating generally: governing body function: Section 29
• Children and young people with SEN but no plan: Section 34
• Independent specialist schools and special post-16 institutions – approval:
Section 41
• Schools and other institutions named in EHC plan: duty to admit: Section
43
• Using best endeavours to secure special educational provision: Section 66
• Code of Practice: Section 77
The Equality Act 2010
Regulations
The Special Educational Needs and Disability Regulations 2014
Introduction
7.1 The post-16 education and training landscape is very diverse. It encompasses
school sixth forms (both mainstream and special schools), sixth form colleges,
general further education (FE) colleges, 16-19 academies, special post-16
institutions, and vocational learning and training providers in the private or voluntary
sector. The range of available study programmes is broad and includes AS/A-levels,
vocational qualifications at all levels, apprenticeships, traineeships, supported
internships and bespoke packages of learning. School provision is covered in
Chapter 6.
111

===== PAGE 112 =====
7.2 Mainstream providers include school sixth forms, general FE colleges, sixth form
colleges, specialist art and design and land-based colleges and 16-19 academies.
Colleges are usually very much larger than schools, and offer an extensive breadth
of courses to young people and adults of all ages. Special school sixth forms,
independent specialist colleges and many general FE colleges specialise in
provision for students with SEN. Post-16 provision is also offered by not-for-profit
and voluntary sector, independent and private training and employment services.
Unless stated otherwise, the use of ‘college’ throughout this chapter encompasses
general FE colleges, specialist art and design and land-based colleges, sixth form
colleges, 16-19 academies and special post-16 institutions approved under section
41 of the Children and Families Act 2014.
Statutory duties on post-16 institutions
7.3 FE colleges, sixth form colleges, 16-19 academies and independent specialist
colleges approved under Section 41 of the Children and Families Act 2014 (the Act)
have the following specific statutory duties:
• The duty to co-operate with the local authority on arrangements for
children and young people with SEN. This is a reciprocal duty. It means
that, in carrying out their functions under this part of the Act, a local
authority must co-operate with the named bodies who, in turn, must co-
operate with the local authority.
• The duty to admit a young person if the institution is named in an
Education Health and Care (EHC) plan. Young people have the right to
request that an institution is named in their EHC plan, and local authorities
have a duty to name that institution in the EHC plan unless, following
consultation with the institution, the local authority determines that it is
unsuitable for the young person’s age, ability, aptitude or SEN, or that to
place the young person there would be incompatible with the efficient use
of resources or the efficient education of others.
• The duty to have regard to this Code of Practice
• The duty to use their best endeavours to secure the special
educational provision that the young person needs. This duty applies to
further education colleges, sixth form colleges and 16-19 academies. Its
purpose is to ensure that providers give the right support to their students
with SEN. It does not apply to independent specialist colleges or special
schools, as their principal purpose is to provide for young people with SEN.
They must fulfil this duty for students with SEN whether or not the students
have EHC plans. This duty applies in respect of students with SEN up to
age 25 in further education, including those aged between 14 and 16
112

===== PAGE 113 =====
recruited directly by colleges. The duty encompasses students on a wide
variety of study programmes (including some on short programmes) and at
every level from entry level upwards. It does not apply to any students on
higher education courses, who can access the Disabled Students
Allowance (DSA). Much of this section will also be relevant for independent
specialist colleges.
7.4 A young person has SEN if he or she has a learning difficulty or disability which calls
for special educational provision to be made for them. Special educational provision
is support which is additional or different to support usually available to young people
of the same age in mainstream colleges. For more detailed information on the
definition of SEN, see the Introduction. Colleges should offer an inclusive approach
to learning and teaching, with high quality teaching which is differentiated for
individuals. This approach should be embedded in their provision in all subject areas
and at all levels, and support the teaching of all students, including those with SEN.
7.5 Colleges should be ambitious for young people with SEN, whatever their needs and
whatever their level of study. They should focus on supporting young people so they
can progress and reach positive destinations in adult life. These destinations include
higher education or further training or employment, independent living (which means
having choice and control over the support received), good health and participating
in the community. Further information on support for young people in preparing for
adult life is set out in Chapter 8, Preparing for adulthood from the earliest years.
7.6 All students aged 16-19 (and students up to the age of 25 where they have an EHC
plan) should follow a coherent study programme which provides stretch and
progression and enables them to achieve the best possible outcomes in adult life.
Further detail on study programmes and pathways to employment is given in
Chapter 8, Preparing for adulthood from the earliest years, paragraphs 8.32 to 8.40.
More detailed information on what constitutes good outcome setting is given in
Chapter 9, Education, Health and Care needs assessments and plans, paragraphs
9.64 to 9.69). These principles should be applied to planning for all young people.
Equality Act 2010
7.7 FE colleges, sixth form colleges, 16-19 academies and independent special schools
approved under Section 41 of the Children and Families Act 2014 have duties under
the Equality Act 2010. In particular, they must not discriminate against, harass or
victimise disabled children or young people and they must make reasonable
adjustments to prevent them being placed at a substantial disadvantage. This duty is
anticipatory – it requires thought to be given in advance to what disabled young
people might require and what adjustments might need to be made to prevent that
disadvantage.
7.8 Providers have wider duties to prevent discrimination, to promote equality of
opportunity and to foster good relations. Chapter 1, Principles, provides further
113

===== PAGE 114 =====
details on the disability discrimination duties in the Equality Act 2010. The guidance
in this chapter should be read in the light of the principles in Chapter 1 which focus
on inclusive practice and removing barriers to learning.
Careers guidance for young people
7.9 FE colleges and sixth form colleges are required through their funding agreements to
secure access to independent careers guidance for all students up to and including
age 18 and for 19- to 25-year-olds with EHC plans. Chapter 8 provides more
information about careers guidance for children and young people.
Identifying SEN
7.10 Colleges should be involved in transition planning between school and college so
that they can prepare to meet the student’s needs and ensure a successful transition
into college life. Chapter 8, paragraphs 8.22 to 8.28, gives guidance to schools and
colleges on how they should work together to smooth that transition. Colleges should
give all applicants an opportunity before or at entry and at subsequent points, to
declare whether they have a learning need, a disability or a medical condition which
will affect their learning. If a student makes a declaration the college should discuss
with the student how they will provide support. Any screenings and assessments
should be differentiated and proportionate to the likely level of SEN.
7.11 Some needs may emerge after a student has begun a programme. Teaching staff
should work with specialist support to identify where a student may be having
difficulty which may be because of SEN.
7.12 Students who fell behind at school, or who are studying below level 2, should have
their needs identified and appropriate support should be provided. It should not be
assumed that they have SEN just because they have lower attainment levels than
the majority of their peers. They may do, but this should be identified specifically and
supported. Equally it should not be assumed that students working on higher level
courses do not have any learning difficulty or disability that may need special
educational provision.
SEN support in college
7.13 Where a student has a learning difficulty or disability that calls for special educational
provision, the college must use its best endeavours to put appropriate support in
place. Young people should be supported to participate in discussions about their
aspirations, their needs, and the support that they think will help them best. Support
should be aimed at promoting student independence and enabling the young person
to make good progress towards employment and/or higher education, independent
living, good health and participating in the community. Chapter 8 provides guidance
on preparing young people for adult life.
114

===== PAGE 115 =====
7.14 Support should be evidence based. This means that colleges should be aware of
effective practice in the sector and elsewhere, and personalise it for the individual.
They should keep the needs of students with SEN or disabilities under regular
review. Colleges should take a cyclical approach to assessing need, planning and
providing support, and reviewing and evaluating that support so that it can be
adjusted where necessary. They should involve the student and, particularly for
those aged 16 to 18, their parents, closely at all stages of the cycle, planning around
the individual, and they should ensure that staff have the skills to do this effectively.
Assessing what support is needed
7.15 Where a student is identified as having SEN and needing SEN support, colleges
should bring together all the relevant information from the school, from the student,
from those working with the student and from any screening test or assessment the
college has carried out. This information should be discussed with the student. The
student should be offered support at this meeting and might be accompanied by a
parent, advocate or other supporter. This discussion may identify the need for a
more specialist assessment from within the college or beyond.
Planning the right support
7.16 Where the college decides a student needs SEN support, the college should discuss
with the student their ambitions, the nature of the support to be put in place, the
expected impact on progress and a date for reviewing the support. Plans should be
developed with the student. The support and intervention provided should be
selected to meet the student’s aspirations, and should be based on reliable evidence
of effectiveness and provided by practitioners with the relevant skills and knowledge.
7.17 Special educational support might include, for example:
• assistive technology
• personal care (or access to it)
• specialist tuition
• note takers
• interpreters
• one-to-one and small group learning support
• habilitation/independent living training
• accessible information such as symbol based materials
• access to therapies (for example, speech and language therapy)
115

===== PAGE 116 =====
Putting the provision in place
7.18 Colleges should ensure that the agreed support is put in place, and that
appropriately qualified staff provide the support needed. The college should, in
discussion with the student, assess the impact and success of the intervention.
Keeping support under review
7.19 The effectiveness of the support and its impact on the student’s progress should be
reviewed regularly, taking into account the student’s progress and any changes to
the student’s own ambitions and aspirations, which may lead to changes in the type
and level of their support. The college and the student together should plan any
changes in support. Colleges should revisit this cycle of action, refining and revising
their decisions about support as they gain a richer understanding of the student, and
what is most effective in helping them secure good outcomes. Support for all
students with SEN should be kept under review, whether or not a student has an
EHC plan.
7.20 Where a student has an EHC plan, the local authority must review that plan as a
minimum every twelve months, including a review of the student’s support. The
college must co-operate with the local authority in the review process. As part of the
review, the local authority can ask the college to convene and hold the annual review
meeting on its behalf. Further information about EHC plan reviews and the role of
colleges is given in Chapter 9, Education, Health and Care needs assessments and
plans. From the age of thirteen onwards, annual reviews focus on preparing for
adulthood. Further information on pathways to employment and on support for young
people in preparing for adult life is set out in Chapter 8, Preparing for adulthood from
the earliest years.
7.21 Colleges should also keep under review the reasonable adjustments they make
under the Equality Act 2010 to ensure they have removed all the barriers to learning
that they reasonably can. Colleges should also ensure that students with SEN or
disabilities know who to go to for support.
Expertise within and beyond the college
7.22 The governing bodies of colleges should ensure that all staff interact appropriately
and inclusively with students who have SEN or a disability and should ensure that
they have appropriate expertise within their workforce. They should also ensure that
curriculum staff are able to develop their skills, are aware of effective practice and
keep their knowledge up to date. Colleges should make sure they have access to
specialist skills and expertise to support the learning of students with SEN. This can
be through partnerships with other agencies such as adult social care or health
services, or specialist organisations, and/or by employing practitioners directly. They
should ensure that there is a named person in the college with oversight of SEN
provision to ensure co-ordination of support, similar to the role of the SEN Co-
116

===== PAGE 117 =====
ordinator (SENCO) in schools. This person should contribute to the strategic and
operational management of the college. Curriculum and support staff in a college
should know who to go to if they need help in identifying a student’s SEN, are
concerned about their progress or need further advice. In reviewing and managing
support for students with SEN, colleges and 16-19 academies may find the broad
areas of need and support outlined in Chapter 6 helpful (paragraph 6.28 onwards).
7.23 Colleges should ensure they have access to external specialist services and
expertise. These can include, for example, educational psychologists, Child and
Adolescent Mental Health Services (CAMHS), specialist teachers and support
services, supported employment services and therapists. They can be involved at
any point for help or advice on the best way to support a student with SEN or a
disability. Specialist help should be involved where the student’s needs are not being
met by the strong, evidence-based support provided by the college. Where, despite
the college having taken relevant and purposeful action to identify, assess and meet
the needs of the student, the student is still not making the expected progress, the
college or young person should consider requesting an EHC needs assessment (see
Chapter 9).
7.24 More guidance on the advice and support colleges should give students with SEN or
disabilities to enable them to prepare for adult life, including the transition out of
college, is in Chapter 8, Preparing for adulthood from the earliest years.
Record keeping
7.25 Colleges should keep a student’s profile and record of support up to date to inform
discussions with the student about their progress and support. This should include
accurate information to evidence the SEN support that has been provided over a
student’s time in college and its effectiveness. They should record details of what
additional or different provision they make to meet a student’s SEN and their
progress towards specified outcomes. This should include information about the
student’s SEN, interventions and the support of specialists. The information should
be used as part of regular discussions with the student and, where appropriate, the
family, about the student’s progress, the expected outcomes and planned next steps.
For young people detained in custody, a Youth Offending Team will seek information
from the college to support their initial assessments. The college should respond to
such requests as soon as possible (see Chapter 10).
7.26 As with schools, colleges will determine their own approach to record keeping but
should ensure that Individualised Learner Record (ILR) data is recorded accurately
and in a timely manner in line with funding rules. Where students have EHC plans,
colleges should provide the local authority with regular information about the
progress that student is making towards the agreed outcomes set out in their EHC
plan. Where a student has support from the local authority’s high needs funding but
does not have an EHC plan, colleges should also provide information on the
student’s progress to the local authority to inform its commissioning.
117

===== PAGE 118 =====
7.27 Further information on support to help children and young people prepare for
adulthood, including pathways to employment and the transition to adult services, is
in Chapter 8. Information about seeking needs assessments and about EHC plans is
in Chapter 9.
Funding for SEN support
7.28 All school and academy sixth forms, sixth form colleges, further education colleges
and 16-19 academies are provided with resources to support students with additional
needs, including young people with SEN and disabilities.
7.29 These institutions receive an allocation based on a national funding formula for their
core provision. They also have additional funding for students with additional needs,
including those with SEN. This funding is not ring-fenced and is included in their
main allocation in a ‘single line’ budget. Like mainstream schools, colleges are
expected to provide appropriate, high quality SEN support using all available
resources.
7.30 It is for colleges, as part of their normal budget planning, to determine their approach
to using their resources to support the progress of young people with SEN. The
principal or a senior leader should establish a clear picture of the resources available
to the college and consider their strategic approach to meeting SEN in the context of
the total resources available.
7.31 This will enable colleges to provide a clear description of the types of special
educational provision they normally provide. This will help parents and others
understand what they can normally expect the college to provide for young people
with SEN.
7.32 Colleges are not expected to meet the full costs of more expensive support from
their core and additional funding in their main allocation. They are expected to
provide additional support which costs up to a nationally prescribed threshold per
student per year. The responsible local authority, usually the authority where the
young person lives, should provide additional top-up funding where the cost of the
special educational provision required to meet the needs of an individual young
person exceeds the nationally prescribed threshold. This should reflect the cost of
providing the additional support that is in excess of the nationally prescribed
threshold. There is no requirement for an EHC plan for a young person for whom a
college receives additional top-up funding except in the case of a young person who
is over 19. But where the local authority considers it is necessary for special
educational provision to be made through an EHC plan it should carry out an EHC
needs assessment. Local authorities should be transparent about how they will make
decisions about high needs funding and education placements. They should share
the principles and criteria which underpin those decisions with schools and colleges
and with parents and young people.
118

===== PAGE 119 =====
7.33 It should be noted that colleges are funded by the Education Funding Agency (EFA)
for all 16-18 year olds and for those aged 19-25 who have EHC plans, with support
from the home local authority for students with high needs. Colleges must not
charge tuition fees for these young people. Further information on funding can be
found on the GOV.UK website – see the References section under Chapter 7 for a
link.
7.34 Colleges are funded by the Skills Funding Agency (SFA) for all students aged 19 and
over who do not have an EHC plan (including those who declare a learning difficulty
or disability). Colleges are able to charge fees for these students. However, students
who meet residency and eligibility criteria will have access to Government funding.
Further information on funding eligibility is available on the SFA’s website – see the
References section under Chapter 7 for a link. Colleges also receive funding from
HEFCE for their higher education (HE) students, but this Code does not apply to HE
students.
7.35 Further information on funding places for 19-25 year olds is given in Chapter 8,
Preparing for adulthood from the earliest years.
119

===== PAGE 120 =====
8 Preparing for adulthood from the earliest years
What this chapter covers
This chapter is relevant for everyone working with children and young people with
SEN or disabilities and is particularly relevant for those working with children and
young people aged 14 and over. It sets out how professionals across education
(including early years, schools, colleges and 16-19 academies), health and social
care should support children and young people with special educational needs
(SEN) or disabilities to prepare for adult life, and help them go on to achieve the best
outcomes in employment, independent living, health and community participation.
The principles set out in this chapter apply to all young people with SEN or
disabilities, except where it states they are for those with Education, Health and Care
(EHC) plans only. The term ‘colleges’ in this chapter includes all post-16 institutions
with duties under the Children and Families Act 2014 (further education (FE)
colleges, sixth form colleges, 16-19 academies and independent specialist colleges
approved under Section 41 of the Act).
High aspirations are crucial to success – discussions about longer term goals should
start early and ideally well before Year 9 (age 13-14) at school. They should focus on
the child or young person’s strengths and capabilities and the outcomes they want to
achieve. This chapter includes both the transition into post-16 education, and the
transition from post-16 education into adult life. It covers:
• how local authorities and health services should plan strategically for the
support children and young people will need to prepare for adult life
• how early years providers, schools and colleges should enable children and
young people to have the information and skills they need to help them gain
independence and prepare for adult life
• support from Year 9, including the content of preparing for adulthood
reviews for children and young people with EHC plans
• planning the transition into post-16 education
• how post-16 institutions can design study programmes and create
pathways to employment
• how young people should be supported to make decisions for themselves
• Packages of provision for children and young people with EHC plans
across five days a week
120

===== PAGE 121 =====
• transition to higher education
• young people aged 19-25
• transition to adult health services
• transition to adult social care
• leaving education and training and progressing into employment
Relevant legislation
Primary
This chapter cross-references a wide range of duties under the Children and
Families Act 2014 and regulations. Some, but not all, of the main duties are as
follows:
• Local authority functions: supporting and involving children and young
people, Section 19
• Joint commissioning arrangements: Section 26
• Duty to keep education and care provision under review: Section 27
• Co-operating generally: local authority functions: Section 28
• Co-operating generally: governing body functions: Section 29
• Local offer: Section 30
• Advice and information: Section 32
• Assessment of education, health and care needs: Section 36
• Preparation of EHC plans: draft plan: Section 38
• Personal Budgets and direct payments: Section 49
• Continuation of services under Section 17 of the Children Act 1989:
Section 50
• Appeals: Section 51
Regulations
The Special Educational Needs and Disability Regulations 2014
121

===== PAGE 122 =====
The Special Educational Needs (Personal Budgets) Regulations 2014
Introduction
7.37 Being supported towards greater independence and employability can be life-
transforming for children and young people with SEN. This support needs to start
early, and should centre around the child or young person’s own aspirations,
interests and needs. All professionals working with them should share high
aspirations and have a good understanding of what support is effective in enabling
children and young people to achieve their ambitions.
7.38 Preparing for adulthood means preparing for:
• higher education and/or employment – this includes exploring different
employment options, such as support for becoming self-employed and help
from supported employment agencies
• independent living – this means young people having choice, control and
freedom over their lives and the support they have, their accommodation
and living arrangements, including supported living
• participating in society, including having friends and supportive
relationships, and participating in, and contributing to, the local community
• being as healthy as possible in adult life
Strategic planning for the best outcomes in adult life
8.1 Local authorities must place children, young people and families at the centre of
their planning, and work with them to develop co-ordinated approaches to securing
better outcomes, as should clinical commissioning groups (CCGs). They should
develop a shared vision and strategy which focuses on aspirations and outcomes,
using information from EHC plans and other planning to anticipate the needs of
children and young people with SEN and ensure there are pathways into
employment, independent living, participation in society and good health. Where
pathways need further development, local authorities and CCGs should set out clear
responsibilities, timescales and funding arrangements for that work. This strategic
planning will contribute to their
• joint commissioning
• Local Offer, which must include support in preparing for adulthood (see
paragraphs 4.52 to 4.56 in Chapter 4, The Local Offer)
• preparation of EHC plans and support for children and young people to
achieve the outcomes in their plan
122

===== PAGE 123 =====
8.2 This planning and support will bring enormous benefits to individuals. The National
Audit Office report ‘Oversight of special education for young people aged 16-25’
published in November 2011, estimates that supporting one person with a learning
disability into employment could, in addition to improving their independence and
self-esteem, increase that person’s income by between 55 and 95 per cent. The
National Audit Office also estimates that equipping a young person with the skills to
live in semi-independent rather than fully supported housing could, in addition to
quality of life improvements, reduce lifetime support costs to the public purse by
around £1 million.
Duties on local authorities
8.3 Local authorities have a range of duties which are particularly relevant to this
chapter. They are:
• when carrying out their functions, to support and involve the child and his or
her parent, or the young person, and to have regard to their views, wishes
and feelings (see Chapter 1, Principles). This includes their aspirations for
adult life
• to offer advice and information directly to children and young people (see
Chapter 2, Impartial information, advice and support). This includes
information and advice which supports children and young people to
prepare for adult life
• together with health services, to make joint commissioning arrangements
about the education, health and care provision of children and young
people to secure positive adult outcomes for young people with SEN (see
Chapter 3, Working together across Education, Health and Care for joint
outcomes)
• to keep education and care provision under review including the duty to
consult young people directly, and to consult schools, colleges and other
post-16 providers (see Chapter 3, Working together across Education,
Health and Care for joint outcomes)
• to co-operate with FE colleges, sixth-form colleges, 16-19 academies and
independent specialist colleges approved under Section 41 of the Children
and Families Act 2014
• to include in the Local Offer provision which will help children and young
people prepare for adulthood and independent living, to consult children
and young people directly about the Local Offer and to publish those
comments including details of any actions to be taken (Chapter 4, The
Local Offer)
123

===== PAGE 124 =====
• to consider the need for EHC needs assessments, prepare EHC plans
where needed, and maintain and review them, including the duty to ensure
that all reviews of EHC plans from Year 9 (age 13-14) onwards include a
focus on preparing for adulthood and, for 19-25 year olds, to have regard to
whether educational or training outcomes specified in the EHC plan have
been achieved
• to make young people aware through their Local Offer of the kind of
support available to them in higher education and, where a higher
education place has been confirmed for a young person with an EHC plan,
to pass a copy of the EHC plan to the relevant institution and to the
assessor for Disabled Students Allowance with the young person’s
permission
8.4 This is not a comprehensive list of local authority duties under the Children and
Families Act 2014 or of regulations made under it. It is included to provide an
overview, not detailed guidance on local authority duties.
Starting early
8.5 When a child is very young, or SEN is first identified, families need to know that the
great majority of children and young people with SEN or disabilities, with the right
support, can find work, be supported to live independently, and participate in their
community. Health workers, social workers, early years providers and schools
should encourage these ambitions right from the start. They should seek to
understand the interests, strengths and motivations of children and young people
and use this as a basis for planning support around them.
8.6 Early years providers and schools should support children and young people so that
they are included in social groups and develop friendships. This is particularly
important when children and young people are transferring from one phase of
education to another (for example, from nursery to primary school). Maintained
nurseries and schools must ensure that, subject to certain conditions, pupils with
SEN engage in the activities of the nursery or school together with those who do not
have SEN, and are encouraged to participate fully in the life of the nursery or school
and in any wider community activity.
Support from Year 9 onwards (age 13-14)
8.7 High aspirations about employment, independent living and community participation
should be developed through the curriculum and extra-curricular provision. Schools
should seek partnerships with employment services, businesses, housing agencies,
disability organisations and arts and sports groups, to help children understand what
is available to them as they get older, and what it is possible for them to achieve. It
can be particularly powerful to meet disabled adults who are successful in their work
124

===== PAGE 125 =====
or who have made a significant contribution to their community. For children with
EHC plans, Personal Budgets can be used to help children and young people with
SEN to access activities that promote greater independence and learn important life
skills. Local authorities must ensure that the relevant services they provide co-
operate in helping children and young people to prepare for adulthood. This may
include, for example, housing services, adult social care and economic regeneration.
8.8 For teenagers, preparation for adult life needs to be a more explicit element of their
planning and support. Discussions about their future should focus on what they want
to achieve and the best way to support them to achieve. Considering the right post-
16 option is part of this planning. Chapter 9 includes more detail about the process of
developing an EHC plan. Children and young people’s aspirations and needs will not
only vary according to individual circumstances, but will change over time as they get
older and approach adult life.
Children and young people with EHC plans: preparing for
adulthood reviews
8.9 Local authorities must ensure that the EHC plan review at Year 9, and every review
thereafter, includes a focus on preparing for adulthood. It can be helpful for EHC
plan reviews before Year 9 to have this focus too. Planning must be centred around
the individual and explore the child or young person’s aspirations and abilities, what
they want to be able to do when they leave post-16 education or training and the
support they need to achieve their ambition. Local authorities should ensure that
children and young people have the support they need (for example, advocates) to
participate fully in this planning and make decisions. Transition planning must be
built into the revised EHC plan and should result in clear outcomes being agreed that
are ambitious and stretching and which will prepare young people for adulthood.
8.10 Preparing for adulthood planning in the review of the EHC plan should include:
• support to prepare for higher education and/or employment. This should
include identifying appropriate post-16 pathways that will lead to these
outcomes. Training options such as supported internships, apprenticeships
and traineeships should be discussed, or support for setting up your own
business. The review should also cover support in finding a job, and
learning how to do a job (for example, through work experience
opportunities or the use of job coaches) and help in understanding any
welfare benefits that might be available when in work
• support to prepare for independent living, including exploring what
decisions young people want to take for themselves and planning their role
in decision making as they become older. This should also include
discussing where the child or young person wants to live in the future, who
125

===== PAGE 126 =====
they want to live with and what support they will need. Local housing
options, support in finding accommodation, housing benefits and social
care support should be explained
• support in maintaining good health in adult life, including effective planning
with health services of the transition from specialist paediatric services to
adult health care. Helping children and young people understand which
health professionals will work with them as adults, ensuring those
professionals understand the young person’s learning difficulties or
disabilities and planning well-supported transitions is vital to ensure young
people are as healthy as possible in adult life
• support in participating in society, including understanding mobility and
transport support, and how to find out about social and community
activities, and opportunities for engagement in local decision-making. This
also includes support in developing and maintaining friendships and
relationships
8.11 The review should identify the support the child or young person needs to achieve
these aspirations and should also identify the components that should be included in
their study programme to best prepare them for adult life. It should identify how the
child or young person wants that support to be available and what action should be
taken by whom to provide it. It should also identify the support a child or young
person may need as they prepare to make more decisions for themselves.
8.12 Further guidance on preparing for the transition to post-16 education is given in
paragraphs 8.22 to 8.28. Further guidance on transition to higher education is
provided in paragraphs 8.45 to 8.50, and on leaving education and training in
paragraphs 8.77 to 8.80.
Young people preparing to make their own decisions
8.13 As young people develop, and increasingly form their own views, they should be
involved more and more closely in decisions about their own future. After compulsory
school age (the end of the academic year in which they turn 16) the right to make
requests and decisions under the Children and Families Act 2014 applies to them
directly, rather than to their parents. Parents, or other family members, can continue
to support young people in making decisions, or act on their behalf, provided that the
young person is happy for them to do so, and it is likely that parents will remain
closely involved in the great majority of cases.
8.14 The specific decision-making rights about EHC plans (see Chapter 9) which apply to
young people directly from the end of compulsory school age are:
126

===== PAGE 127 =====
• the right to request an assessment for an EHC plan (which they can do at
any time up to their 25th birthday)
• the right to make representations about the content of their EHC plan
• the right to request that a particular institution is named in their EHC plan
• the right to request a Personal Budget for elements of an EHC plan
• the right to appeal to the First-tier Tribunal (SEN and Disability) about
decisions concerning their EHC plan
8.15 Local authorities, schools, colleges, health services and other agencies should
continue to involve parents in discussions about the young person’s future. In
focusing discussions around the individual young person, they should support that
young person to communicate their needs and aspirations and to make decisions
which are most likely to lead to good outcomes for them, involving the family in most
cases. A decision by a young person in respect of an EHC plan will typically involve
discussion with their family and others, but the final decision rests with the young
person.
8.16 A young person can ask a family member or friend to support them in any way they
wish, including, for example, receiving correspondence on their behalf, filling in
forms, attending meetings, making telephone calls and helping them to make
decisions. Local authorities and other agencies working with young people should
work flexibly to accommodate these arrangements. They should also be flexible
about accommodating any changes in those arrangements over time, since the
nature of the family’s involvement may alter as the young person becomes older and
more independent.
16- to 17-year-olds
8.17 Where a young person is under 18, the involvement of parents is particularly
important and local authorities should continue to involve them in the vast majority of
decisions. Schools and colleges normally involve the parents or family members of
students under 18 where they have concerns about a young person’s attendance,
behaviour or welfare and they should continue to do so. They should also continue to
involve parents or family members in discussions about the young person’s studies
where that is their usual policy. Child safeguarding law applies to children and young
people up to the age of 18. The fact that the Children and Families Act 2014 gives
rights directly to young people from the end of compulsory school age does not
necessitate any change to a local authority’s, school’s or college’s safeguarding or
welfare policy.
127

===== PAGE 128 =====
Support for young people
8.18 Some young people will need support from an independent skilled supporter to
ensure that their views are acknowledged and valued. They may need support in
expressing views about their education, the future they want in adult life, and how
they prepare for it, including their health, where they live, their relationships, control
of their finances, how they will participate in the community and how they will
achieve greater autonomy and independence. Local authorities should ensure young
people who need it have access to this support.
The Mental Capacity Act
8.19 The right of young people to make a decision is subject to their capacity to do so as
set out in the Mental Capacity Act 2005. The underlying principle of the Act is to
ensure that those who lack capacity are empowered to make as many decisions for
themselves as possible and that any decision made or action taken on their behalf is
done so in their best interests. Decisions about mental capacity are made on an
individual basis, and may vary according to the nature of the decision. Someone who
may lack capacity to make a decision in one area of their life may be able to do so in
another. There is further guidance on the Mental Capacity Act and how it applies
both to parents and to young people in relation to the Act in Annex 1, Mental
Capacity.
Planning the transition into post-16 education and training
8.20 Young people entering post-16 education and training should be accessing provision
which supports them to build on their achievements at school and which helps them
progress towards adulthood. Young people with EHC plans are likely to need more
tailored post-16 pathways.
8.21 As children approach the transition point, schools and colleges should help children
and their families with more detailed planning. For example, in Year 9, they should
aim to help children explore their aspirations and how different post-16 education
options can help them meet them. FE colleges and sixth form colleges can now
recruit students directly from age 14, and so this will be an option in some cases. In
Year 10 they should aim to support the child and their family to explore more specific
courses or places to study (for example, through taster days and visits) so they can
draw up provisional plans. In Year 11 they should aim to support the child and their
family to firm up their plans for their post-16 options and familiarise themselves with
the expected new setting. This should include contingency planning and the child
and their family should know what to do if plans change (because of exam results for
example).
128

===== PAGE 129 =====
8.22 It is important that information about previous SEN provision is shared with the
further education or training provider. Schools should share information before the
young person takes up their place, preferably in the spring term prior to the new
course, so that the provider can develop a suitable study programme and prepare
appropriate support. Where a change in education setting is planned, in the period
leading up to that transition schools should work with children and young people and
their families, and the new college or school, to ensure that their new setting has a
good understanding of what the young person’s aspirations are and how they would
like to be supported. This will enable the new setting to plan support around the
individual. Some children and young people will want a fresh start when leaving
school to attend college and any sharing of information about their SEN should be
sensitive to their concerns and done with their agreement.
8.23 Schools and colleges should work in partnership to provide opportunities such as
taster courses, link programmes and mentoring which enable young people with
SEN to familiarise themselves with the college environment and gain some
experience of college life and study. This can include, for example, visits and taster
days so that young people can become familiar with the size of the college, and how
their studies will be structured, including how many days a week their programme
covers. These will enable them to make more informed choices, and help them make
a good transition into college life. Schools and colleges should agree a ‘tell us once’
approach so that families and young people do not have to repeat the same
information unnecessarily.
8.24 For children and young people with EHC plans, discussions about post-16 options
will be part of the preparing for adulthood focus of ECH plan reviews, which must be
included as part of the review from Year 9 (age 13-14). The local authority must
ensure these reviews take place, and schools and colleges must co-operate with the
local authority in these reviews. If it is clear that a young person wants to attend a
different school (sixth form) or a college, then that school or college must co-
operate, so that it can help to shape the EHC plan, help to define the outcomes for
that young person and start developing a post-16 study programme tailored to their
needs.
8.25 Where SEN has been identified at school, colleges should use any information they
have from the school about the young person. In some cases, SEN may have been
identified at school, and information passed to the college in advance, and colleges
should use this information, and seek clarification and further advice when needed
from the school (or other agencies where relevant), to ensure they are ready to meet
the needs of the student and that the student is ready for the move to college.
8.26 Under statutory guidance accompanying the Autism Strategy, SEN Co-ordinators
(SENCOs) should inform young people with autism of their right to a community care
129

===== PAGE 130 =====
assessment and their parents of the right to a carer’s assessment. This should be
built into preparing for adulthood review meetings for those with EHC plans. (See
8.61 to 8.66, Transition assessments for young people with EHC plans.)
Careers advice for children and young people
8.27 Maintained schools and pupil referral units (PRUs) have a statutory duty under
section 42A of the Education Act 1997 to ensure pupils from Year 8 until Year 13 are
provided with independent careers guidance. Academies, including 16-19
academies, and free schools are subject to this duty through their Funding
Agreements. FE colleges also have equivalent requirements in their Funding
Agreements – their duty applies for all students up to and including age 18 and will
apply to 19- to 25-year-olds with EHC plans.
8.28 Schools and colleges should raise the career aspirations of their SEN students and
broaden their employment horizons. They should use a wide range of imaginative
approaches, such as taster opportunities, work experience, mentoring, exploring
entrepreneurial options, role models and inspiring speakers.
8.29 Local authorities have a strategic leadership role in fulfilling their duties concerning
the participation of young people in education and training. They should work with
schools, colleges and other post-16 providers, as well as other agencies, to support
young people to participate in education or training and to identify those in need of
targeted support to help them make positive and well-informed choices. Statutory
guidance for local authorities on the participation of young people in education,
employment and training is available from the GOV.UK website – a link is given in
the Reference section under Chapter 8.
High quality study programmes for students with SEN
8.30 All students aged 16 to 19 (and, where they will have an EHC plan, up to the age of
25) should follow a coherent study programme which provides stretch and
progression and enables them to achieve the best possible outcomes in adult life.
Schools and colleges are expected to design study programmes which enable
students to progress to a higher level of study than their prior attainment, take
rigorous, substantial qualifications, study English and maths, participate in
meaningful work experience and non-qualification activity. They should not be
repeating learning they have already completed successfully. For students who are
not taking qualifications, their study programme should focus on high quality work
experience, and on non-qualification activity which prepares them well for
employment, independent living, being healthy adults and participating in society.
Full guidance about study programmes is available on the GOV.UK website – a link
is given in the Reference section under Chapter 8.
130

===== PAGE 131 =====
Pathways to employment
8.31 All young people should be helped to develop the skills and experience, and achieve
the qualifications they need, to succeed in their careers. The vast majority of young
people with SEN are capable of sustainable paid employment with the right
preparation and support. All professionals working with them should share that
presumption. Colleges that offer courses which are designed to provide pathways to
employment should have a clear focus on preparing students with SEN for work.
This includes identifying the skills that employers value, and helping young people to
develop them.
8.32 One of the most effective ways to prepare young people with SEN for employment is
to arrange work-based learning that enables them to have first-hand experience of
work, such as:
• Apprenticeships: These are paid jobs that incorporate training, leading to
nationally recognised qualifications. Apprentices earn as they learn and
gain practical skills in the workplace. Many lead to highly skilled careers.
Young people with EHC plans can retain their plan when on an
apprenticeship.
• Traineeships: These are education and training programmes with work
experience, focused on giving young people the skills and experience they
need to help them compete for an apprenticeship or other jobs.
Traineeships last a maximum of six months and include core components
of work preparation training, English and maths (unless GCSE A*-C
standard has already been achieved) and a high quality work experience
placement. They are currently open to young people aged 16 to 24,
including those with EHC plans. Young people with EHC plans can retain
their plan when undertaking a traineeship.
• Supported internships: These are structured study programmes for
young people with an EHC plan, based primarily at an employer.
Internships normally last for a year and include extended unpaid work
placements of at least six months. Wherever possible, they support the
young person to move into paid employment at the end of the programme.
Students complete a personalised study programme which includes the
chance to study for relevant substantial qualifications, if suitable, and
English and maths to an appropriate level. Young people with EHC plans
will retain their plan when undertaking a supported internship.
8.33 When considering a work placement as part of a study programme, such as a
supported internship, schools or colleges should match students carefully with the
available placements. A thorough understanding of the student’s potential, abilities,
131

===== PAGE 132 =====
interests and areas they want to develop should inform honest conversations with
potential employers. This is more likely to result in a positive experience for the
student and the employer.
8.34 Schools and colleges should consider funding from Access to Work, available from
the Department for Work and Pensions, as a potential source of practical support for
people with disabilities or health (including mental health) conditions on entering
work and apprenticeships, as well as the in-work elements of traineeships or
supported internships. More information is available from the GOV.UK website and
the Preparing for Adulthood website – links to both are given in the Reference
section under Chapter 8.
8.35 In preparing young people for employment, local authorities, schools and colleges
should be aware of the different employment options for disabled adults. This should
include ‘job-carving’ – tailoring a job so it is suitable for a particular worker and their
skills. This approach not only generates employment opportunities for young people
with SEN, but can lead to improved productivity in the employer organisation.
8.36 Help to support young people with SEN into work is available from supported
employment services. These can provide expert, individualised support to secure
sustainable, paid work. This includes support in matching students to suitable work
placements, searching for a suitable job and providing training (for example, from job
coaches) in the workplace when a job has been secured. Local authorities should
include supported employment services in their Local Offer (see Chapter 4, The
Local Offer).
8.37 Education and training should include help for students who need it to develop skills
which will prepare them for work, such as communication and social skills, using
assistive technology, and independent travel training. It can also include support for
students who may want to be self-employed, such as setting up a micro-enterprise.
8.38 It helps young people to know what support they may receive from adult services,
when considering employment options. Where a young person may need support
from adult services, local authorities should consider undertaking a transition
assessment to aid discussions around pathways to employment (see paragraph 8.59
below under ‘Transition to adult social care’).
Packages of support across five days a week
8.39 Where young people have EHC plans, local authorities should consider the need to
provide a full package of provision and support across education, health and care
that covers five days a week, where that is appropriate to meet the young person’s
needs.
132

===== PAGE 133 =====
8.40 Five-day packages of provision and support do not have to be at one provider and
could involve amounts of time at different providers and in different settings. It may
include periods outside education institutions with appropriate support, including time
and support for independent study. A package of provision can include non-
educational activities such as:
• volunteering or community participation
• work experience
• opportunities that will equip young people with the skills they need to make a
successful transition to adulthood, such as independent travel training, and/or
skills for living in semi-supported or independent accommodation, and
• training to enable a young person to develop and maintain friendships and/or
support them to access facilities in the local community.
It can also include health and care related activities such as physiotherapy. Full-time
packages of provision and support set out in the EHC plan should include any time
young people need to access support for their health and social care needs.
8.41 When commissioning provision, local authorities should have regard to how young
people learn and the additional time and support they may need to undertake
coursework and homework as well as time to socialise with their college peers within
the college environment. In some cases, courses normally offered over three days
may need to be spread over four or five days where that is likely to lead to better
outcomes. Local authorities will need to work with providers and young people to
ensure there is a range of opportunities that can be tailored to individual needs,
including the use of Personal Budgets.
8.42 In making decisions about packages of support, local authorities should take into
account the impact on the family and the effect this impact is likely to have on the
young person’s progress.
Transition to higher education
8.43 Securing a place in higher education is a positive outcome for many young people
with SEN. Where a young person has this ambition, the right level of provision and
support should be provided to help them to achieve that goal, wherever possible.
8.44 The local authority must make young people aware through their local offer of the
support available to them in higher education and how to claim it, including the
Disabled Students Allowance (DSA). DSAs are available to help students in higher
education with the extra costs they may incur on their course because of a disability.
This can include an ongoing health condition, mental health condition or specific
133

===== PAGE 134 =====
learning difficulty such as dyslexia. Students need to make an application to Student
Finance England (for students domiciled in England), providing accompanying
medical evidence. A link to further information on DSAs is given in the Reference
section under Chapter 7.
8.45 Applications for DSA can be made as soon as the student finance application service
opens. This varies from year to year, but is generally at least six months before the
start of the academic year in which a young person is expecting to take up a place in
higher education. Local authorities should encourage young people to make an early
claim for DSA so that support is in place when their course begins. Where a young
person with an EHC plan makes a claim for DSA, the local authority must pass a
copy of their plan to the relevant DSA assessor, to support and inform the application
as soon as possible, where they are asked to do so by the young person. This
should include relevant supporting diagnostic and medical information and
assessments where the young person agrees.
8.46 Local authorities should plan a smooth transition to the higher education (and, where
applicable, to the new local authority area) before ceasing to maintain a young
person’s EHC plan. Once the young person’s place has been confirmed at a higher
education institution, the local authority must pass a copy of their EHC plan to the
relevant person in that institution at the earliest opportunity, where they are asked to
do so by the young person.
8.47 The local authority should also plan how social care support will be maintained,
where the young person continues to require it, and whether this will continue to be
provided by the home local authority or by the authority in the area they are moving
to. This should include consideration of how the student will be supported if they
have a dual location, for example, if they live close to the higher education institution
during term time and at home during vacations.
8.48 For most young people, their home local authority will continue to provide their care
and support but this will depend on the circumstances of their case. The Ordinary
Residence guidance published by the Department of Health provides a number of
examples to help local authorities in making these decisions. The guidance is
available on the GOV.UK website and a link is given in the Reference section under
Chapter 8. Under the Care Act 2014, young people have the right to request
transition assessments for adult care that will enable them to see whether they are
likely to have eligible needs that will be met by adult services once they turn 18.
Local authorities should use these assessments to help plan for support that will be
provided by the local authority while a young person is in higher education.
134

===== PAGE 135 =====
Young people aged 19 to 25
8.49 Local authorities should be ambitious for children and young people with SEN,
raising their aspirations and promoting high expectations about what they can
achieve in school, college and beyond. Local authorities should ensure children and
young people have access to the right support and opportunities that will prepare
them successfully for adulthood by helping them achieve the agreed outcomes in
their EHC plan. This will enable many more young people with SEN to complete their
formal education.
8.50 Local authorities must set out in their Local Offer the support and provision that 19-
to 25-year-olds with SEN can access regardless of whether they have an EHC plan
(see Chapter 4, The Local Offer). Further education colleges must continue to use
their best endeavours to secure the special educational provision needed by all
young people aged 19 to 25 with SEN attending their institution. For guidance on
EHC plans for young people aged 19 to 25, see Chapter 9.
Funding places for 19- to 25-year-olds
8.51 19- to 25-year-olds with EHC plans should have free access to further education in
the same way as 16- to18-year-olds. Colleges or training providers must not charge
young people tuition fees for such places as the funding will be provided by the local
authority and the Education Funding Agency (EFA). Further information on funding is
available from the EFA pages on GOV.UK – a link is provided in the References
section under Chapter 7.
8.52 Apprentices aged 19 to 25 with EHC plans are fully funded on the same terms and
funding rates as 16- to 18-year-old apprentices. The Local Offer should include
apprenticeships for this age group and full details of apprenticeship funding are
available from the Skills Funding Agency (SFA) website – a link is given in the
References section under Chapter 7.
8.53 19- to 25-year-olds with SEN but without EHC plans can choose to remain in further
education. Colleges are funded by the SFA for all students aged 19 and over who do
not have an EHC plan (including those who declare a learning difficulty or disability).
Colleges are able to charge fees for these students, but must use their best
endeavours to secure the necessary special educational provision that they need.
However, students who meet residency and eligibility criteria will have access to
Government funding. Information on funding eligibility is available on the SFA’s
website – see the References section under Chapter 7 for a link. Local authorities
are not responsible for securing or funding education and training opportunities for
young people aged 19 to 25 who do not have EHC plans.
135

===== PAGE 136 =====
Transition to adult health services
8.54 Support to prepare young people for good health in adulthood should include
supporting them to make the transition to adult health services. A child with
significant health needs is usually under the care of a paediatrician. As an adult, they
might be under the care of different consultants and teams. Health service and other
professionals should work with the young person and, where appropriate, their
family. They should gain a good understanding of the young person’s individual
needs, including their learning difficulties or disabilities, to co-ordinate health care
around those needs and to ensure continuity and the best outcomes for the young
person. This means working with the young person to develop a transition plan,
which identifies who will take the lead in co-ordinating care and referrals to other
services. The young person should know who is taking the lead and how to contact
them.
8.55 For young people with EHC plans, the plan should be the basis for co-ordinating the
integration of health with other services. Where young people are moving to adult
health services, the local authority and health services must co-operate, working in
partnership with each other and the young person to ensure that the EHC plan and
the care plan for the treatment and management of the young person’s health are
aligned. The clinical commissioning group (CCG) must co-operate with the local
authority in supporting the transition to adult services and must jointly commission
services that will help meet the outcomes in the EHC plan.
8.56 In supporting the transition from Child and Adolescent Mental Health Services
(CAMHS) to adult mental health services, clinical commissioning groups (CCGs) and
local authorities should refer to The Mental Health Action Plan, Closing the Gap:
Priorities for essential change in mental health (see References section under
Chapter 8 for a link). This action plan identifies transition from CAMHS to adult
services as a priority for action. CCGs and local authorities should have regard to
any published service specification for transition from CAMHS. They should use the
specification to build person-centred services that take into account the
developmental needs of the young person as well as the need for age- appropriate
services.
Transition to adult social care
8.57 Young people with SEN turning 18, or their carers, may become eligible for adult
care services, regardless of whether they have an EHC plan or whether they have
been receiving care services under section 17 of the Children Act 1989. Under the
Care Act 2014, the local authority must carry out an adult care transition
assessment where there is significant benefit to a young person or their carer in
doing so and they are likely to have needs for care or support after turning 18.
Transition assessments for adult care must take place at the right time for the
136

===== PAGE 137 =====
individual. There is no set age when young people reach this point and as such
transition assessments should take place when it is of ‘significant benefit’ to them.
8.58 The statutory guidance ‘Transition Guidance for the Care Act 2014’ explains ‘likely
need’ and ‘significant benefit’ in more detail (see References section under Chapter
8 for a link). It also provides further information on local authorities’ roles and
responsibilities for carrying out transition assessments for those turning 18 and,
where relevant, carers who may be eligible for adult assessments.
Transition assessments for young people with EHC plans
8.59 For a young person with an EHC plan, the local authority should ensure that the
transition to adult care and support is well planned, is integrated with the annual
reviews of the EHC plans and reflects existing special educational and health
provision that is in place to help the young person prepare for adulthood.
8.60 As with EHC plan development in general, transition assessments for adult care and
support must involve the young person and anyone else they want to involve in the
assessment. They must also include the outcomes, views and wishes that matter to
the young person – much of which will already be set out in their EHC plan.
8.61 Assessments for adult care or support must consider:
• current needs for care and support
• whether the young person is likely to have needs for care and support after
they turn 18, and
• if so, what those needs are likely to be and which are likely to be eligible
needs
8.62 Local authorities can meet their statutory duties around transition assessment
through an annual review of a young person’s EHC plan that includes the above
elements. Indeed, EHC plans must include provision to assist in preparing for
adulthood from Year 9 (age 13 to14).
8.63 Having carried out a transition assessment, the local authority must give an
indication of which needs are likely to be regarded as eligible needs so the young
person understands the care and support they are likely to receive once children’s
services cease. Where a young person’s needs are not eligible for adult services,
local authorities must provide information and advice about how those needs may
be met and the provision and support that young people can access in their local
area. Local authorities should ensure this information is incorporated into their Local
Offer.
137

===== PAGE 138 =====
8.64 Statutory guidance accompanying the Autism Strategy places a duty on SENCOs in
schools and a named person within a college with SEN oversight to inform young
people with autism of their right to a community care assessment and their parents
of a right to a carer’s assessment. Where a young person has an EHC plan, this
should be built into their preparing for adulthood reviews.
Continuity of provision
8.65 Under no circumstances should young people find themselves suddenly without
support and care as they make the transition to adult services. Very few moves from
children’s to adult services will or should take place on the day of someone’s 18th
birthday. For the most part, transition to adult services for those with EHC plans
should begin at an appropriate annual review and in many cases should be a staged
process over several months or years.
8.66 Under the Care Act 2014 local authorities must continue to provide a young person
with children’s services until they reach a conclusion about their situation as an adult,
so that there is no gap in provision. Reaching a conclusion means that, following a
transition assessment, the local authority concludes that the young person:
• does not have needs for adult care and support, or
• does have such needs and begins to meet some or all of them, or
• does have such needs but decides it is not going to meet them (either
because they are not eligible needs or because they are already being met)
8.67 The local authority can also decide to continue to provide care and support from
children’s services after the young person has turned 18. This can continue until the
EHC plan is no longer maintained but when the EHC plan ceases or a decision is
made that children’s services are no longer appropriate, the local authority must
continue the children’s services until they have reached a conclusion about their
need for support from adult services.
EHC plans and statutory care and support plans
8.68 Local authorities must put in place a statutory care and support plan for young
people with eligible needs for adult care and support. Local authorities must meet
the needs of the young person set out in their care and support plan.
8.69 Where young people aged 18 or over continue to have EHC plans, and are receiving
care and support, this will be provided under the Care Act 2014. The statutory adult
care and support plan should form the ‘care’ element of the young person’s EHC
plan. While the care part of the EHC plan must meet the requirements of the Care
Act 2014 and a copy should be kept by adult services, it is the EHC plan that should
138

===== PAGE 139 =====
be the overarching plan that is used with these young people to ensure they receive
the support they need to enable them to achieve agreed outcomes.
8.70 Local authorities must set out in section H2 of the EHC plan any adult care and
support that is reasonably required by the young person’s learning difficulties or
disabilities. For those over 18, this will be those elements of their statutory care and
support plan that are directly related to their learning difficulties or disabilities. EHC
plans may also specify other adult care and support in the young person’s care and
support plan where appropriate, but the elements directly related to learning
difficulties and disabilities should always be included as they will be of particular
relevance to the rest of the EHC plan.
8.71 Local authorities should ensure that local systems and processes for assessment
and review of EHC plans and care and support plans are fully joined up for young
people who will have both. Every effort should be made to ensure that young people
with both EHC plans and care and support plans do not have to attend multiple
reviews held by different services, provide duplicate information, or receive support
that is not joined up and co-ordinated.
8.72 When a young person’s EHC plan is due to come to an end, local authorities should
put in place effective plans for the support the young person will be receiving across
adult services. Where a care and support plan is in place, this will remain as the
young person’s statutory plan for care and support. Local authorities should review
the provision of adult care and support at this point as the young person’s
circumstances will be changing significantly as they leave the formal education and
training system.
8.73 Where a safeguarding issue arises for someone over 18 with an EHC plan, the
matter should be dealt with as a matter of course by the adult safeguarding team.
They should involve the local authority’s child safeguarding colleagues where
appropriate as well as any relevant partners (for example, the police or NHS) or
other persons relevant to the case. The same approach should apply for complaints
or appeals.
Personal Budgets
8.74 Where a transition assessment identifies needs that are likely to be eligible, local
authorities should consider providing an indicative Personal Budget so that young
people have an idea of how much their care and support will cost when they enter
the adult system. This is particularly important if young people with EHC plans are
already exercising their statutory right to a Personal Budget as any adult with eligible
needs will have a care and support plan which must include a Personal Budget.
Young people with EHC plans may also consider the transition to adult services a
good opportunity to start exercising their right to start receiving their Personal Budget
139

===== PAGE 140 =====
as a direct payment. Local authorities must follow the guidance on Personal
Budgets set out in Chapter 9 of this Code of Practice and the Personal Budget
Guidance for the Care Act 2014 (see References section under Chapter 8 for a link).
Leaving education or training
8.75 All young people with SEN should be supported to make the transition to life beyond
school or college, whether or not they have an EHC plan. As well as preparing them
for adulthood generally, schools and colleges should ensure that young people with
SEN have the information they need to make the final steps in this transition. This
includes information about local employers, further training, and where to go for
further advice or support.
8.76 For young people with EHC plans, where it is known that a young person will soon
be completing their time in education and training, the local authority should use the
annual review prior to ceasing the EHC plan to agree the support and specific steps
needed to help the young person to engage with the services and provision they will
be accessing once they have left education.
8.77 Some young people will be moving into employment or going on to higher education.
Others will primarily require ongoing health and/or care support and/or access to
adult learning opportunities. They may be best supported by universal health
services and adult social care and support, alongside learning opportunities in the
adult skills sector. For those who have just completed an apprenticeship, traineeship
or supported internship the best option may be for them to leave formal education or
training and either begin some sort of paid employment resulting from their work
placement, or to access further support and training available to help them secure a
job through Jobcentre Plus.
8.78 This transition should be planned with timescales and clear responsibilities and the
young person should know what will happen when their EHC plan ceases. During
this planning process, the local authority must continue to maintain the young
person’s EHC plan as long as the young person needs it and remains in education or
training.
140

===== PAGE 141 =====
9 Education, Health and Care needs assessments
and plans
What the chapter covers
This chapter covers all the key stages in statutory assessment and planning and
preparing the Education, Health and Care (EHC) plan, and guidance on related
topics.
It includes:
• when a local authority must carry out an EHC needs assessment, including
in response to a request
• who must be consulted and provide advice
• the statutory steps required by the process of EHC needs assessment and
EHC plan development, including timescales
• how to write an EHC plan
• requesting a particular school, college or other institution
• requesting and agreeing Personal Budgets, including sources of funding
• finalising and maintaining an EHC plan
• transferring an EHC plan
• reviews and re-assessments of an EHC plan
• ceasing an EHC plan
• disclosing an EHC plan
Relevant legislation
Primary
Sections 36 – 50 of the Children and Families Act 2014
The Care Act 2014
Section 2 of the Chronically Sick and Disabled Persons Act 1970
Sections 17, 20 and 47 of the Children Act 1989
Regulations
The Special Educational Needs and Disability Regulations 2014
The Special Educational Needs (Personal Budgets) Regulations 2014
141

===== PAGE 142 =====
Special Educational Needs (Miscellaneous Amendments) Regulations 2014
The Community Care Services for Carers and Children’s Services (Direct Payments)
Regulations 2009
The National Health Service (Direct Payments) Regulations 2013
The Special Educational Needs and Disability (Detained Persons) Regulations 2015
Introduction
9.1 The majority of children and young people with SEN or disabilities will have their
needs met within local mainstream early years settings, schools or colleges (as set
out in the information on identification and support in Chapters 5, 6 and 7). Some
children and young people may require an EHC needs assessment in order for the
local authority to decide whether it is necessary for it to make provision in
accordance with an EHC plan.
9.2 The purpose of an EHC plan is to make special educational provision to meet the
special educational needs of the child or young person, to secure the best possible
outcomes for them across education, health and social care and, as they get older,
prepare them for adulthood. To achieve this, local authorities use the information
from the assessment to:
• establish and record the views, interests and aspirations of the parents and
child or young person
• provide a full description of the child or young person’s special educational
needs and any health and social care needs
• establish outcomes across education, health and social care based on the
child or young person’s needs and aspirations
• specify the provision required and how education, health and care services
will work together to meet the child or young person’s needs and support
the achievement of the agreed outcomes
9.3 A local authority must conduct an assessment of education, health and care needs
when it considers that it may be necessary for special educational provision to be
made for the child or young person in accordance with an EHC plan. The factors a
local authority should take into account in deciding whether it needs to undertake an
EHC needs assessment are set out in paragraphs 9.14 to 9.15, and the factors a
local authority should take into account in deciding whether an EHC plan is
necessary are set out in paragraphs 9.53 to 9.56. The EHC needs assessment
should not normally be the first step in the process, rather it should follow on from
142

===== PAGE 143 =====
planning already undertaken with parents and young people in conjunction with an
early years provider, school, post-16 institution or other provider. In a very small
minority of cases children or young people may demonstrate such significant
difficulties that a school or other provider may consider it impossible or inappropriate
to carry out its full chosen assessment procedure. For example, where its concerns
may have led to a further diagnostic assessment or examination which shows the
child or young person to have severe sensory impairment or other impairment which,
without immediate specialist intervention beyond the capacity of the school or other
provider, would lead to increased learning difficulties.
9.4 During the transition period local authorities will transfer children and young people
with statements onto the new system (see paragraphs x and xi of the Introduction
and paragraph 1.17 in Chapter 1, Principles, for more information on transition and
transfer of statements). No-one should lose their statement and not have it replaced
with an EHC plan simply because the system is changing.
9.5 EHC plans should be forward-looking documents that help raise aspirations and
outline the provision required to meet assessed needs to support the child or young
person in achieving their ambitions. EHC plans should specify how services will be
delivered as part of a whole package and explain how best to achieve the outcomes
sought across education, health and social care for the child or young person.
9.6 An EHC needs assessment will not always lead to an EHC plan. The information
gathered during an EHC needs assessment may indicate ways in which the school,
college or other provider can meet the child or young person’s needs without an
EHC plan.
9.7 The statutory processes and timescales set out in this chapter must be followed by
local authorities. Local authorities should conduct assessments and prepare and
maintain EHC plans in the most efficient way possible, working collaboratively with
children and young people and their parents. It should be possible to complete the
process more quickly than the statutory timescales permit, except in more complex
cases or where there is disagreement. It is vital that a timely process is supported by
high quality engagement with the child and his or her parents or the young person
throughout the assessment, planning and review process.
Requesting an EHC needs assessment
Relevant legislation: Section 36 of the Children and Families Act 2014
9.8 The following people have a specific right to ask a local authority to conduct an
education, health and care needs assessment for a child or young person aged
between 0 and 25:
143

===== PAGE 144 =====
• the child’s parent
• a young person over the age of 16 but under the age of 25, and
• a person acting on behalf of a school or post-16 institution (this should
ideally be with the knowledge and agreement of the parent or young person
where possible)
9.9 In addition, anyone else can bring a child or young person who has (or may have)
SEN to the attention of the local authority, particularly where they think an EHC
needs assessment may be necessary. This could include, for example, foster carers,
health and social care professionals, early years practitioners, youth offending teams
or probation services, those responsible for education in custody, school or college
staff or a family friend. Bringing a child or young person to the attention of the local
authority will be undertaken on an individual basis where there are specific concerns.
This should be done with the knowledge and, where possible, agreement of the
child’s parent or the young person.
9.10 Children and young people under 19 in youth custodial establishments also have the
right to request an assessment for an EHC plan. The child’s parent, the young
person themselves or the professionals working with them can ask the home local
authority to conduct an EHC needs assessment while they are still detained. The
process and principles for considering and carrying out an EHC needs assessment
and maintaining an EHC plan for children and young people in youth custody are set
out in Chapter 10, Children and young people in specific circumstances.
Considering whether an EHC needs assessment is
necessary
Relevant legislation: Section 36 of the Children and Families Act 2014 and
Regulations 3, 4, and 5 of the SEND Regulations 2014
9.11 Following a request for an EHC needs assessment, or the child or young person
having otherwise been brought to its attention, the local authority must determine
whether an EHC needs assessment is necessary. The local authority must make a
decision and communicate the decision to the child’s parent or to the young person
within 6 weeks of receiving the request. The local authority does not have to
consider whether an EHC needs assessment is necessary where it has already
undertaken an EHC needs assessment for the child or young person during the
previous six months, although the local authority may choose to do so if it thinks it is
appropriate.
9.12 The local authority must notify the child’s parent or the young person that it is
considering whether an EHC assessment is necessary, and must consult the child’s
144

===== PAGE 145 =====
parent or the young person as soon as practicable following a request for an EHC
needs assessment (or having otherwise become responsible). This is particularly
important where the request was not made by the child’s parent or the young person,
so they have sufficient time to provide their views. In considering whether an EHC
needs assessment is necessary, local authorities must have regard to the views,
wishes and feelings of the child and his or her parent, or the young person. At an
early stage, the local authority should establish how the child and his or her parent or
the young person can best be kept informed and supported to participate as fully as
possible in decision-making. The local authority must arrange for the child and his or
her parent or the young person to be provided with advice and information relevant
to the child or young person’s SEN, (for more information, see paragraph 9.21 and
Chapter 2).
9.13 Where the local authority considers that special educational provision may need to
be made in accordance with an EHC plan and is considering whether an EHC needs
assessment is necessary, it must notify:
• the child’s parent or the young person (and must inform them of their right
to express written or oral views and submit evidence to the local authority)
• the health service (the relevant Clinical Commissioning Group (CCG) or
NHS England where it has responsibility for a child or young person)
• local authority officers responsible for social care for children or young
people with SEN
• where a child attends an early years setting, the manager of that setting
• where a child or young person is registered at a school, the head teacher
(or equivalent)
• where the young person attends a post-16 institution, the principal (or
equivalent)
9.14 In considering whether an EHC needs assessment is necessary, the local authority
should consider whether there is evidence that despite the early years provider,
school or post-16 institution having taken relevant and purposeful action to identify,
assess and meet the special educational needs of the child or young person, the
child or young person has not made expected progress. To inform their decision the
local authority will need to take into account a wide range of evidence, and should
pay particular attention to:
• evidence of the child or young person’s academic attainment (or
developmental milestones in younger children) and rate of progress
145

===== PAGE 146 =====
• information about the nature, extent and context of the child or young
person’s SEN
• evidence of the action already being taken by the early years provider,
school or post-16 institution to meet the child or young person’s SEN
• evidence that where progress has been made, it has only been as the
result of much additional intervention and support over and above that
which is usually provided
• evidence of the child or young person’s physical, emotional and social
development and health needs, drawing on relevant evidence from
clinicians and other health professionals and what has been done to meet
these by other agencies, and
• where a young person is aged over 18, the local authority must consider
whether the young person requires additional time, in comparison to the
majority of others of the same age who do not have special educational
needs, to complete their education or training. Remaining in formal
education or training should help young people to achieve education and
training outcomes, building on what they have learned before and preparing
them for adult life.
9.15 A young person who was well supported through the Local Offer while at school may
move to a further education (FE) college where the same range or level of support is
not available. An EHC plan may then be needed to ensure that support is provided
and co-ordinated effectively in the new environment. It may also be the case that
young people acquire SEN through illness or accident, or have an existing condition
that requires increasing support as they get older.
9.16 Local authorities may develop criteria as guidelines to help them decide when it is
necessary to carry out an EHC needs assessment (and following assessment, to
decide whether it is necessary to issue an EHC plan). However, local authorities
must be prepared to depart from those criteria where there is a compelling reason to
do so in any particular case and demonstrate their willingness to do so where
individual circumstances warrant such a departure. Local authorities must not apply
a ‘blanket’ policy to particular groups of children or certain types of need, as this
would prevent the consideration of a child’s or young person’s needs individually and
on their merits.
9.17 The local authority must decide whether or not to proceed with an EHC needs
assessment, and must inform the child’s parent or the young person of their decision
within a maximum of six weeks from receiving a request for an EHC needs
146

===== PAGE 147 =====
assessment (or having otherwise become responsible). The local authority must
give its reasons for this decision where it decides not to proceed. The local authority
must also notify the other parties listed in section 9.13 above of its decision.
9.18 If the local authority intends to conduct an EHC needs assessment, it must ensure
the child’s parent or the young person is fully included from the start and made
aware of opportunities to offer views and information.
9.19 If the local authority decides not to conduct an EHC needs assessment it must
inform the child’s parents or the young person of their right to appeal that decision
and the time limit for doing so, of the requirement for them to consider mediation
should they wish to appeal, and the availability of information, advice and support
and disagreement resolution services. The local authority should also provide
feedback collected during the process of considering whether an EHC needs
assessment is necessary, including evidence from professionals, which the parent,
young person, early years provider, school or post-16 institution may find useful.
Principles underpinning co-ordinated assessment and
planning
Relevant legislation: Section 19 of the Children and Families Act 2014 and
Regulations 7 and 9 of the SEND Regulations 2014
9.20 Children, young people and families should experience well co-ordinated
assessment and planning leading to timely, well informed decisions. The following
general principles underpin effective assessment and planning processes:
Involving children, young people and parents in decision-making
9.21 Local authorities must consult the child and the child’s parent or the young person
throughout the process of assessment and production of an EHC plan. They should
also involve the child as far as possible in this process. The needs of the individual
child and young person should sit at the heart of the assessment and planning
process. Planning should start with the individual and local authorities must have
regard to the views, wishes and feelings of the child, child’s parent or young person,
their aspirations, the outcomes they wish to seek and the support they need to
achieve them. It should enable children, young people and parents to have more
control over decisions about their support including the use of a Personal Budget for
those with an EHC plan.
9.22 The assessment and planning process should:
• focus on the child or young person as an individual
147

===== PAGE 148 =====
• enable children and young people and their parents to express their views,
wishes and feelings
• enable children and young people and their parents to be part of the
decision-making process
• be easy for children, young people and their parents or carers to
understand, and use clear ordinary language and images rather than
professional jargon
• highlight the child or young person’s strengths and capabilities
• enable the child or young person, and those that know them best to say
what they have done, what they are interested in and what outcomes they
are seeking in the future
• tailor support to the needs of the individual
• organise assessments to minimise demands on families
• bring together relevant professionals to discuss and agree together the
overall approach, and
• deliver an outcomes-focused and co-ordinated plan for the child or young
person and their parents
9.23 This approach is often referred to as a person-centred approach. By using this
approach within a family context, professionals and local authorities can ensure that
children, young people and parents are involved in all aspects of planning and
decision-making.
9.24 Local authorities should support and encourage the involvement of children, young
people and parents or carers by:
• providing them with access to the relevant information in accessible formats
• giving them time to prepare for discussions and meetings, and
• dedicating time in discussions and meetings to hear their views
9.25 In addition, some children and young people will require support from an advocate
where necessary (this could be a family member or a professional) to ensure that
their views are heard and acknowledged. They may need support in expressing
views about their education, their health, the future and how to prepare for it,
including where they will live, relationships, control of their finances, how they will
148

===== PAGE 149 =====
participate in the community and how they will achieve greater autonomy and
independence. Local authorities should ensure that children and young people who
need it have access to this support.
9.26 Practitioners in all services involved in the assessment and planning process need to
be skilled in working with children, parents and young people to help them make
informed decisions. All practitioners should have access to training so they can do
this effectively.
Support for children, young people and parents
9.27 Local authorities should have early discussions with parents or the young person
about what the EHC needs assessment process and development of an EHC plan
will involve, and the range of options that will be available, such as different types of
educational institution and options for Personal Budgets and how these may differ
depending on the type of educational institution for which the parents or young
person express a preference.
9.28 Local authorities must work with parents and children and young people to
understand how best to minimise disruption for them and their family life. For
example, multiple appointments should be co-ordinated or combined where possible
and appropriate.
9.29 Local authorities must provide all parents, children and young people with impartial
information, advice and support in relation to SEN to enable them to take part
effectively in the assessment and planning process. This will include the EHC needs
assessment process, EHC plans and Personal Budgets (including the take-up and
ongoing management of direct payments). This should include information on key
working and independent supporters as appropriate. (See Chapter 2 for more
information.)
Co-ordination
9.30 Local authorities are responsible for ensuring that there is effective co-ordination of
the assessment and development process for an EHC plan. The co-ordination
should include:
• planning the process to meet the needs of children, parents and young
people
• timing meetings to minimise family disruption
• keeping the child’s parent or young person informed through a single point
of contact wherever possible and
149

===== PAGE 150 =====
• ensuring relevant professionals have sufficient notice to be able to
contribute to the process
9.31 The EHC needs assessment and plan development process should be supported by
senior leadership teams monitoring the quality and sufficiency of EHC needs
assessments through robust quality assurance systems. Families should have
confidence that those overseeing the assessment process will be impartial and act in
their best interests.
Sharing information
9.32 Information sharing is vital to support an effective assessment and planning process
which fully identifies needs and outcomes and the education, health and care
provision needed by the child or young person. Local authorities with their partners
should establish local protocols for the effective sharing of information which
addresses confidentiality, consent and security of information (see the References
section under Chapter 9 for a link to the DfE advice ‘Information sharing for
practitioners and managers’). Agencies should work together to agree local protocols
for information collection and management so as to inform planning of provision for
children and young people with SEN or disabilities at both individual and strategic
levels.
9.33 As far as possible, there should be a ‘tell us once’ approach to sharing information
during the assessment and planning process so that families and young people do
not have to repeat the same information to different agencies, or different
practitioners and services within each agency.
9.34 Local authorities must discuss with the child and young person and their parents
what information they are happy for the local authority to share with other agencies.
A record should be made of what information can be shared and with whom. (See
paragraphs 9.211 to 9.213 for further information on confidentiality and disclosing
EHC plans.)
Timely provision of services
9.35 Where particular services are assessed as being needed, such as those resulting
from statutory social care assessments under the Children Act 1989 or adult social
care legislation, their provision should be delivered in line with the relevant statutory
guidance and should not be delayed until the EHC plan is complete. For social care,
help and support should be given to the child and family as soon as a need is
identified and not wait until the completion of an EHC needs assessment.
150

===== PAGE 151 =====
Cross-agency working
9.36 Joint working between local authorities and CCGs in the development of an EHC
plan supports the provision of effective services for children and young people with
SEN. (See Chapter 3, Working together across Education, Health and Care for joint
outcomes, for guidance on services working together, and the section later in this
chapter on agreeing the health provision in EHC plans.)
9.37 Consideration should be given to:
• the range of professionals across education, health and care who need to
be involved and their availability
• flexibility for professionals to engage in a range of ways and to plan their
input as part of forward planning
• providing opportunities for professionals to feed back on the process, and
its implementation, to support continuous improvement
Looked after children
9.38 Local authorities should be particularly aware of the need to avoid any delays for
looked after children and carry out the EHC needs assessment in the shortest
possible timescale. Addressing a looked after child’s special educational needs will
be a crucial part of avoiding breakdown in their care placement.
Timescales for EHC needs assessment and preparation of
an EHC plan
Relevant legislation: Sections 36, 37, 38, 39 and 40 of the Children and Families Act
2014 and Regulations 4, 5, 8, 10, and 13 of the SEND Regulations 2014
9.39 The process of EHC needs assessment and EHC plan development must be carried
out in a timely manner. The time limits set out below are the maximum time allowed.
However, steps must be completed as soon as practicable. Local authorities should
ensure that they have planned sufficient time for each step of the process, so that
wherever possible, any issues or disagreements can be resolved within the statutory
timescales. Where the child’s parent or the young person agrees, it may be possible
to carry out steps much more quickly and flexibly. For example, a child’s parent or
the young person might be happy to agree changes to an EHC plan following a
review while at the review meeting, where all parties are content. Under no
circumstances should the child’s parent or the young person be put under pressure
to agree things more quickly than they feel comfortable with, and where there is any
doubt or the child’s parent or the young person requests more time, local authorities
must follow the steps and timescales set out in this guidance.
151

===== PAGE 152 =====
9.40 The whole process of EHC needs assessment and EHC plan development, from the
point when an assessment is requested (or a child or young person is brought to the
local authority’s attention) until the final EHC plan is issued, must take no more than
20 weeks (subject to exemptions set out below).
9.41 The following specific requirements apply:
• Local authorities must give their decision in response to any request for an
EHC needs assessment within a maximum of 6 weeks from when the
request was received or the point at which a child or young person was
brought to the local authority’s attention
• When local authorities request information as part of the EHC needs
assessment process, those supplying the information must respond in a
timely manner and within a maximum of 6 weeks from the date of the
request
• If a local authority decides, following an EHC needs assessment, not to
issue an EHC plan, it must inform the child’s parent or the young person
within a maximum of 16 weeks from the request for a EHC needs
assessment, and
• The child’s parent or the young person must be given 15 calendar days to
consider and provide views on a draft EHC plan and ask for a particular
school or other institution to be named in it
9.42 Where there are exceptional circumstances, it may not be reasonable to expect local
authorities and other partners to comply with the time limits above. The Special
Educational Needs and Disability Regulations 2014 set out specific exemptions.
These include where:
• appointments with people from whom the local authority has requested
information are missed by the child or young person (this only applies to the
duty on partners to comply with a request under the EHC needs
assessment process within six weeks)
• the child or young person is absent from the area for a period of at least 4
weeks
• exceptional personal circumstances affect the child or his/her parent, or the
young person, and
• the educational institution is closed for at least 4 weeks, which may delay
the submission of information from the school or other institution (this does
152

===== PAGE 153 =====
not apply to the duty on partners to comply with a request under the EHC
needs assessment process within six weeks)
9.43 The child’s parent or the young person should be informed if exemptions apply so
that they are aware of, and understand, the reason for any delays. Local authorities
should aim to keep delays to a minimum and as soon as the conditions that led to an
exemption no longer apply the local authority should endeavour to complete the
process as quickly as possible. All remaining elements of the process must be
completed within their prescribed periods, regardless of whether exemptions have
delayed earlier elements.
9.44 The diagram on the following page sets out the statutory timescales and decision
points for the process of EHC needs assessment and EHC plan development that
local authorities must adhere to, subject to the specific exemptions set out in
paragraph 9.42. Throughout the statutory process for EHC needs assessment and
EHC plan development, local authorities must work in partnership with the child and
his or her parent or the young person. There is more information earlier in this
chapter on the principles of working with parents and young people, and relevant
statutory requirements.
153

===== PAGE 154 =====
Statutory timescales for EHC needs assessment and EHC plan development
154

===== PAGE 155 =====
Advice and information for EHC needs assessments
Relevant legislation: Section 36 of the Children and Families Act 2014 and
Regulations 6, 7, and 8 of the SEND Regulations 2014
9.45 When carrying out an EHC needs assessment the local authority should seek views
and information from the child using appropriate methods, which might include
observation for a very young child, or the use of different methods of communication
such as the Picture Exchange Communication System.
9.46 The local authority must gather advice from relevant professionals about the child or
young person’s education, health and care needs, desired outcomes and special
educational, health and care provision that may be required to meet identified needs
and achieve desired outcomes.
9.47 The local authority should consider with the child’s parent or the young person and
the parties listed under paragraph 9.49 the range of advice required to enable a full
EHC needs assessment to take place. The principle underpinning this is ‘tell us
once’, avoiding the child’s parent or the young person having to provide the same
information multiple times. The child’s parent or the young person should be
supported to understand the range of assessments available so they can take an
informed decision about whether existing advice is satisfactory. The local authority
must not seek further advice if such advice has already been provided (for any
purpose) and the person providing the advice, the local authority and the child’s
parent or the young person are all satisfied that it is sufficient for the assessment
process. In making this decision, the local authority and the person providing the
advice should ensure the advice remains current.
9.48 Decisions about the level of engagement and advice needed from different parties
will be informed by knowledge of the child or young person held by the early years
provider, school or post-16 institution they attend. For example, if the educational
provider believes there are signs of safeguarding or welfare issues, a statutory social
care assessment may be necessary. If there are signs of an underlying health
difficulty, a specialist health assessment may be necessary.
9.49 In seeking advice and information, the local authority should consider with
professionals what advice they can contribute to ensure the assessment covers all
the relevant education, health and care needs of the child or young person. Advice
and information must be sought as follows (subject to para 9.47 above):
• Advice and information from the child’s parent or the young person. The
local authority must take into account his or her views, wishes and feelings
155

===== PAGE 156 =====
• Educational advice and information from the manager, headteacher or
principal of the early years setting, school or post-16 or other institution
attended by the child or young person. Where this is not available the
authority must seek advice from a person with experience of teaching
children or young people with SEN, or knowledge of the provision which
may meet the child’s or young person’s needs. Where advice from a person
with relevant teaching experience or knowledge is not available and the
child or young person does not attend an educational institution, the local
authority must seek educational advice and information from a person
responsible for educational provision for the child or young person
• If the child or young person is either vision or hearing impaired, or both, the
educational advice and information must be given after consultation with a
person who is qualified to teach pupils or students with these impairments
• Medical advice and information from health care professionals with a role in
relation to the child’s or young person’s health (see the section later in this
chapter on agreeing the health provision in EHC plans)
• Psychological advice and information from an educational psychologist who
should normally be employed or commissioned by the local authority. The
educational psychologist should consult any other psychologists known to
be involved with the child or young person
• Social care advice and information from or on behalf of the local authority,
including, if appropriate, children in need or child protection assessments,
information from a looked after child’s care plan, or adult social care
assessments for young people over 18. In some cases, a child or young
person may already have a statutory child in need or child protection plan,
or an adult social care plan, from which information should be drawn for the
EHC needs assessment
• From Year 9 onwards, advice and information related to provision to assist
the child or young person in preparation for adulthood and independent
living
• Advice and information from any person requested by the child’s parent or
young person, where the local authority considers it reasonable to do so.
For example, they may suggest consulting a GP or other health
professional
• Advice from a youth offending team, where the child or young person is
detained in a Young Offender Institution. Where the young person is
156

===== PAGE 157 =====
serving their sentence in the community the local authority should seek
such advice where it considers it appropriate
• Any other advice and information which the local authority considers
appropriate for a satisfactory assessment, for example:
Early Help Assessments
o
in the case of children of members of the Armed Forces, from the
o
Children’s Education Advisory Service
in the case of a looked after child, from the Virtual School Head in the
o
authority that looks after the child and the child’s Designated Teacher
and the Designated Doctor or Nurse for looked after children
9.50 The local authority must give to those providing advice copies of any
representations made by the child’s parent or the young person, and any evidence
submitted by or at the request of the child’s parent or the young person.
9.51 The evidence and advice submitted by those providing it should be clear, accessible
and specific. They should provide advice about outcomes relevant for the child or
young person’s age and phase of education and strategies for their achievement.
The local authority may provide guidance about the structure and format of advice
and information to be provided. Professionals should limit their advice to areas in
which they have expertise. They may comment on the amount of provision they
consider a child or young person requires and local authorities should not have
blanket policies which prevent them from doing so.
9.52 Advice and information requested by the local authority must be provided within six
weeks of the request, and should be provided more quickly wherever possible, to
enable a timely process. (This is subject to the exemptions set out in paragraph
9.42.)
Deciding whether to issue an EHC plan
Relevant legislation: Sections 36 and 37 of the Children and Families Act 2014
9.53 Where, in the light of an EHC needs assessment, it is necessary for special
educational provision to be made in accordance with an EHC plan, the local authority
must prepare a plan. Where a local authority decides it is necessary to issue an
EHC plan, it must notify the child’s parent or the young person and give the reasons
for its decision. The local authority should ensure it allows enough time to prepare
the draft plan and complete the remaining steps in the process within the 20-week
overall time limit within which it must issue the finalised EHC plan.
157

===== PAGE 158 =====
9.54 In deciding whether to make special educational provision in accordance with an
EHC plan, the local authority should consider all the information gathered during the
EHC needs assessment and set it alongside that available to the local authority prior
to the assessment. Local authorities should consider both the child or young
person’s SEN and the special educational provision made for the child or young
person and whether:
• the information from the EHC needs assessment confirms the information
available on the nature and extent of the child or young person’s SEN prior
to the EHC needs assessment, and whether
• the special educational provision made prior to the EHC needs assessment
was well matched to the SEN of the child or young person
9.55 Where, despite appropriate assessment and provision, the child or young person is
not progressing, or not progressing sufficiently well, the local authority should
consider what further provision may be needed. The local authority should take into
account:
• whether the special educational provision required to meet the child or
young person’s needs can reasonably be provided from within the
resources normally available to mainstream early years providers, schools
and post-16 institutions, or
• whether it may be necessary for the local authority to make special
educational provision in accordance with an EHC plan
9.56 Where a local authority carries out an EHC needs assessment for a child or young
person and
• their circumstances have changed significantly, or
• the child or young person has recently been placed in a new setting, or
• their special educational needs were identified shortly before the EHC
needs assessment,
and no comparable special educational provision was being made for the child or
young person prior to the EHC needs assessment, then the local authority should
consider what new special educational provision is needed, taking into account the
points in 9.55 above.
158

===== PAGE 159 =====
Decision not to issue an EHC plan
Relevant legislation: Section 36 of the Children and Families Act 2014 and
Regulation 10 of the SEND Regulations 2014
9.57 Following the completion of an EHC needs assessment, if the local authority decides
that an EHC plan is not necessary, it must notify the child’s parent or the young
person, the early years provider, school or post-16 institution currently attended, and
the health service and give the reasons for its decision. This notification must take
place as soon as practicable and at the latest within 16 weeks of the initial request or
of the child or young person having otherwise been brought to the local authority’s
attention. The local authority must also inform the child’s parent or the young person
of their right to appeal that decision and the time limit for doing so, of the requirement
for them to consider mediation should they wish to appeal, and the availability of
information, advice and support and disagreement resolution services.
9.58 The local authority should ensure that the child’s parent or the young person are
aware of the resources available to meet SEN within mainstream provision and other
support set out in the Local Offer.
9.59 The local authority should provide written feedback collected during the EHC needs
assessment process, which the child’s parent, the young person, early years
provider, school or post-16 institution can understand and may find useful, including
evidence and reports from professionals. This information can then inform how the
outcomes sought for the child or young person can be achieved through special
educational provision made by the early years provider, school or post-16 institution
and co-ordinated support from other agencies.
Transparent and consistent decision-making
9.60 It is helpful for local authorities to set up moderating groups to support transparency
in decision-making. Such groups can improve the consistency of decision-making
about whether to carry out an EHC needs assessment and whether to issue an EHC
plan. Through sampling and retrospective comparison, moderating groups can also
help local authority practice to become more robust and clearly understood by
schools, early years settings, post-16 institutions, young people and parents.
159

===== PAGE 160 =====
Writing the EHC plan
Relevant legislation: Section 37 of the Children and Families Act 2014 and
Regulations 11 and 12 of the SEND Regulations 2014
9.61 The following principles and requirements apply to local authorities and those
contributing to the preparation of an EHC plan:
• Decisions about the content of EHC plans should be made openly and
collaboratively with parents, children and young people. It should be clear
how the child or young person has contributed to the plan and how their
views are reflected in it
• EHC plans should describe positively what the child or young person can
do and has achieved
• EHC plans should be clear, concise, understandable and accessible to
parents, children, young people, providers and practitioners. They should
be written so they can be understood by professionals in any local authority
• In preparing the EHC plan the local authority must consider how best to
achieve the outcomes sought for the child or young person. The local
authority must take into account the evidence received as part of the EHC
needs assessment
• EHC plans must specify the outcomes sought for the child or young
person. Outcomes in EHC plans should be SMART (specific, measurable,
achievable, realistic, time-bound). See the section on ‘Outcomes’
(paragraph 9.64 onwards) for detailed guidance on outcomes.
• Where a young person or parent is seeking an innovative or alternative way
to receive their support services – particularly through a Personal Budget,
but not exclusively so – then the planning process should include the
consideration of those solutions with support and advice available to assist
the parent or young person in deciding how best to receive their support
• EHC plans should show how education, health and care provision will be
co-ordinated wherever possible to support the child or young person to
achieve their outcomes. The plan should also show how the different types
of provision contribute to specific outcomes
• EHC plans should be forward looking – for example, anticipating, planning
and commissioning for important transition points in a child or young
person’s life, including planning and preparing for their transition to adult life
160

===== PAGE 161 =====
• EHC plans should describe how informal (family and community) support
as well as formal support from statutory agencies can help in achieving
agreed outcomes
• EHC plans should have a review date (which should link to other regular
reviews, including the child in need plan or child protection plan reviews if
appropriate)
Content of EHC plans
Relevant legislation: Section 37 of the Children and Families Act 2014 and
Regulation 12 of the SEND Regulations 2014
9.62 The format of an EHC plan will be agreed locally, and it is expected that the plan will
reflect the principles set out in Chapter 1 of this document. However, as a statutory
minimum, EHC plans must include the following sections, which must be separately
labelled from each other using the letters below. The sections do not have to be in
the order below and local authorities may use an action plan in tabular format to
include different sections and demonstrate how provision will be integrated, as long
as the sections are separately labelled.
Section A: The views, interests and aspirations of the child and his or her parents or
the young person.
Section B: The child or young person’s special educational needs.
Section C: The child or young person’s health needs which are related to their SEN.
Section D: The child or young person’s social care needs which are related to their
SEN or to a disability.
Section E: The outcomes sought for the child or the young person. This should
include outcomes for adult life. The EHC plan should also identify the arrangements
for the setting of shorter term targets by the early years provider, school, college or
other education or training provider.
Section F: The special educational provision required by the child or the young
person.
Section G: Any health provision reasonably required by the learning difficulties or
disabilities which result in the child or young person having SEN. Where an
Individual Health Care Plan is made for them, that plan should be included.
161

===== PAGE 162 =====
Section H1: Any social care provision which must be made for a child or young
person under 18 resulting from section 2 of the Chronically Sick and Disabled
Persons Act 1970.
Section H2: Any other social care provision reasonably required by the learning
difficulties or disabilities which result in the child or young person having SEN. This
will include any adult social care provision being provided to meet a young person’s
eligible needs (through a statutory care and support plan) under the Care Act 2014.
Section I: The name and type of the school, maintained nursery school, post-16
institution or other institution to be attended by the child or young person and the
type of that institution (or, where the name of a school or other institution is not
specified in the EHC plan, the type of school or other institution to be attended by the
child or young person).
Section J: Where there is a Personal Budget, the details of how the Personal
Budget will support particular outcomes, the provision it will be used for including any
flexibility in its usage and the arrangements for any direct payments for education,
health and social care. The special educational needs and outcomes that are to be
met by any direct payment must be specified.
Section K: The advice and information gathered during the EHC needs assessment
must be attached (in appendices). There should be a list of this advice and
information.
9.63 In addition, where the child or young person is in or beyond Year 9, the EHC plan
must include (in sections F, G, H1 or H2 as appropriate) the provision required by
the child or young person to assist in preparation for adulthood and independent
living, for example, support for finding employment, housing or for participation in
society.
Outcomes
Relevant legislation: Section 37 of the Children and Families Act 2014 and
Regulations 11 and 12 of the SEND Regulations 2014
9.64 EHC plans must specify the outcomes sought for the child or young person in
Section E. EHC plans should be focused on education and training, health and care
outcomes that will enable children and young people to progress in their learning
and, as they get older, to be well prepared for adulthood. EHC plans can also include
wider outcomes such as positive social relationships and emotional resilience and
stability. Outcomes should always enable children and young people to move
towards the long-term aspirations of employment or higher education, independent
162

===== PAGE 163 =====
living and community participation. (See Chapter 8 for more details on preparing for
adulthood.)
9.65 Long-term aspirations are not outcomes in themselves – aspirations must be
specified in Section A of the EHC plan. A local authority cannot be held accountable
for the aspirations of a child or young person. For example, a local authority cannot
be required to continue to maintain an EHC plan until a young person secures
employment. However, the EHC plan should continue to be maintained where the
young person wants to remain in education and clear evidence shows that special
educational provision is needed to enable them to achieve the education and training
outcomes required for a course or programme that moves them closer to
employment. For example, by accessing a supported internship or apprenticeship.
9.66 An outcome can be defined as the benefit or difference made to an individual as a
result of an intervention. It should be personal and not expressed from a service
perspective; it should be something that those involved have control and influence
over, and while it does not always have to be formal or accredited, it should be
specific, measurable, achievable, realistic and time bound (SMART). When an
outcome is focused on education or training, it will describe what the expected
benefit will be to the individual as a result of the educational or training intervention
provided. Outcomes are not a description of the service being provided – for
example the provision of three hours of speech and language therapy is not an
outcome. In this case, the outcome is what it is intended that the speech and
language therapy will help the individual to do that they cannot do now and by when
this will be achieved.
9.67 When agreeing outcomes, it is important to consider both what is important to the
child or young person – what they themselves want to be able to achieve – and what
is important for them as judged by others with the child or young person’s best
interests at heart. In the case of speech and language needs, what is important to
the child may be that they want to be able to talk to their friends and join in their
games at playtime. What is important for them is that their behaviour improves
because they no longer get frustrated at not being understood.
9.68 Outcomes underpin and inform the detail of EHC plans. Outcomes will usually set
out what needs to be achieved by the end of a phase or stage of education in order
to enable the child or young person to progress successfully to the next phase or
stage. An outcome for a child of secondary school age might be, for example, to
make sufficient progress or achieve a qualification to enable him or her to attend a
specific course at college. Other outcomes in the EHC plan may then describe what
needs to be achieved by the end of each intervening year to enable him or her to
achieve the college place. From Year 9 onwards, the nature of the outcomes will
reflect the need to ensure young people are preparing for adulthood. In all cases,
163

===== PAGE 164 =====
EHC plans must specify the special educational provision required to meet each of
the child or young person’s special educational needs. The provision should enable
the outcomes to be achieved.
9.69 The EHC plan should also specify the arrangements for setting shorter term targets
at the level of the school or other institution where the child or young person is
placed. Professionals working with children and young people during the EHC needs
assessment and EHC plan development process may agree shorter term targets that
are not part of the EHC plan. These can be reviewed and, if necessary, amended
regularly to ensure that the individual remains on track to achieve the outcomes
specified in their EHC plan. Professionals should, wherever possible, append these
shorter term plans and targets to the EHC plan so that regular progress monitoring is
always considered in the light of the longer term outcomes and aspirations that the
child or young person wants to achieve. In some exceptional cases, progress against
these targets may well lead to an individual outcome within the EHC plan being
amended at times other than following the annual review.
What to include in each section of the EHC plan
Section Information to include
• Details about the child or young person’s aspirations and
(A) The views,
goals for the future (but not details of outcomes to be
interests and
achieved – see section above on outcomes for guidance).
aspirations of the
When agreeing the aspirations, consideration should be
child and their
given to the child or young person’s aspirations for paid
parents, or of the
employment, independent living and community
young person
participation
• Details about play, health, schooling, independence,
friendships, further education and future plans including
employment (where practical)
• A summary of how to communicate with the child or
young person and engage them in decision-making.
• The child or young person’s history
• If written in the first person, the plan should make clear
whether the child or young person is being quoted
directly, or if the views of parents or professionals are
being represented
(B) The child or • All of the child or young person’s identified special
young person’s educational needs must be specified
special educational
• SEN may include needs for health and social care
needs (SEN)
provision that are treated as special educational provision
164

===== PAGE 165 =====
Section Information to include
because they educate or train the child or young person
(see paragraphs 9.73 onwards)
(C) The child or • The EHC plan must specify any health needs identified
young person’s through the EHC needs assessment which relate to the
health needs which child or young person’s SEN. Some health care needs,
relate to their SEN such as routine dental health needs, are unlikely to be
related
• The Clinical Commissioning Group (CCG) may also
choose to specify other health care needs which are not
related to the child or young person’s SEN (for example,
a long-term condition which might need management in a
special educational setting)
(D) The child or • The EHC plan must specify any social care needs
young person’s identified through the EHC needs assessment which
social care needs relate to the child or young person’s SEN or which require
which relate to their provision for a child or young person under 18 under
SEN section 2 of the Chronically Sick and Disabled Persons
Act 1970
• The local authority may also choose to specify other
social care needs which are not linked to the child or
young person’s SEN or to a disability. This could include
reference to any child in need or child protection plan
which a child may have relating to other family issues
such as neglect. Such an approach could help the child
and their parents manage the different plans and bring
greater co-ordination of services. Inclusion must only be
with the consent of the child and their parents
(E) The outcomes • A range of outcomes over varying timescales, covering
sought for the child education, health and care as appropriate but recognising
or the young that it is the education and training outcomes only that will
person help determine when a plan is ceased for young people
aged over 18. Therefore, for young people aged over 17,
the EHC plan should identify clearly which outcomes are
education and training outcomes. See paragraph 9.64
onwards for more detail on outcomes
• A clear distinction between outcomes and provision. The
provision should help the child or young person achieve
an outcome, it is not an outcome in itself
• Steps towards meeting the outcomes
• The arrangements for monitoring progress, including
review and transition review arrangements and the
arrangements for setting and monitoring shorter term
165

===== PAGE 166 =====
Section Information to include
targets by the early years provider, school, college or
other education or training provider
• Forward plans for key changes in a child or young
person’s life, such as changing schools, moving from
children’s to adult care and/or from paediatric services to
adult health, or moving on from further education to
adulthood
• For children and young people preparing for the transition
to adulthood, the outcomes that will prepare them well for
adulthood and are clearly linked to the achievement of the
aspirations in section A
(F) The special • Provision must be detailed and specific and should
educational normally be quantified, for example, in terms of the type,
provision required hours and frequency of support and level of expertise,
by the child or the including where this support is secured through a
young person Personal Budget
• Provision must be specified for each and every need
specified in section B. It should be clear how the provision
will support achievement of the outcomes
• Where health or social care provision educates or trains a
child or young person, it must appear in this section (see
paragraph 9.73)
• There should be clarity as to how advice and information
gathered has informed the provision specified. Where the
local authority has departed from that advice, they should
say so and give reasons for it
• In some cases, flexibility will be required to meet the
changing needs of the child or young person including
flexibility in the use of a Personal Budget
• The plan should specify:
any appropriate facilities and equipment, staffing
o
arrangements and curriculum
any appropriate modifications to the application of
o
the National Curriculum, where relevant
any appropriate exclusions from the application of
o
the National Curriculum or the course being
studied in a post-16 setting, in detail, and the
provision which it is proposed to substitute for any
such exclusions in order to maintain a balanced
and broadly based curriculum
where residential accommodation is appropriate,
o
166

===== PAGE 167 =====
Section Information to include
that fact
where there is a Personal Budget, the outcomes to
o
which it is intended to contribute (detail of the
arrangements for a Personal Budget, including any
direct payment, must be included in the plan and
these should be set out in section J)
• See paragraph 9.131 onwards for details of duties on the
local authority to maintain the special educational
provision in the EHC plan
(G) Any health • Provision should be detailed and specific and should
provision normally be quantified, for example, in terms of the type
reasonably required of support and who will provide it
by the learning
• It should be clear how the provision will support
difficulties or
achievement of the outcomes, including the health needs
disabilities which
to be met and the outcomes to be achieved through
result in the child or
provision secured through a personal (health) budget
young person
having SEN • Clarity as to how advice and information gathered has
informed the provision specified
• Health care provision reasonably required may include
specialist support and therapies, such as medical
treatments and delivery of medications, occupational
therapy and physiotherapy, a range of nursing support,
specialist equipment, wheelchairs and continence
supplies. It could include highly specialist services
needed by only a small number of children which are
commissioned centrally by NHS England (for example
therapeutic provision for young offenders in the secure
estate)
• The local authority and CCG may also choose to specify
other health care provision reasonably required by the
child or young person, which is not linked to their learning
difficulties or disabilities, but which should sensibly be co-
ordinated with other services in the plan
• See paragraph 9.141 for details of duties on the health
service to maintain the health care provision in the EHC
plan
(H1) Any social care • Provision should be detailed and specific and should
provision which normally be quantified, for example, in terms of the type
must be made for a of support and who will provide it (including where this is
child or young to be secured through a social care direct payment)
person under 18
• It should be clear how the provision will support
resulting from
achievement of the outcomes, including any provision
167

===== PAGE 168 =====
Section Information to include
section 2 of the secured through a Personal Budget. There should be
Chronically Sick clarity as to how advice and information gathered has
and Disabled informed the provision specified
Persons Act 1970
• Section H1 of the EHC plan must specify all services
(CSDPA)
assessed as being needed for a disabled child or young
person under 18, under section 2 of the CSDPA. These
services include:
practical assistance in the home
o
provision or assistance in obtaining recreational
o
and educational facilities at home and outside the
home
assistance in travelling to facilities
o
adaptations to the home
o
facilitating the taking of holidays
o
provision of meals at home or elsewhere
o
provision or assistance in obtaining a telephone
o
and any special equipment necessary
non-residential short breaks (included in Section
o
H1 on the basis that the child as well as his or her
parent will benefit from the short break)
• This may include services to be provided for parent
carers of disabled children, including following an
assessment of their needs under sections 17ZD-17ZF of
the Children Act 1989
• See paragraph 9.137 onwards for details of duties on
local authorities to maintain the social care provision in
the EHC plan
(H2) Any other • Social care provision reasonably required may include
social care provision identified through early help and children in
provision need assessments and safeguarding assessments for
reasonably required children. Section H2 must only include services which
by the learning are not provided under Section 2 of the CSDPA. For
difficulties or children and young people under 18 this includes
disabilities which residential short breaks and services provided to children
result in the child or arising from their SEN but unrelated to a disability. This
young person should include any provision secured through a social
having SEN care direct payment. See chapter 10 for more information
on children’s social care assessments
• Social care provision reasonably required will include any
adult social care provision to meet eligible needs for
168

===== PAGE 169 =====
Section Information to include
young people over 18 (set out in an adult care and
support plan) under the Care Act 2014. See Chapter 8 for
further detail on adult care and EHC plans
• The local authority may also choose to specify in section
H2 other social care provision reasonably required by the
child or young person, which is not linked to their learning
difficulties or disabilities. This will enable the local
authority to include in the EHC plan social care provision
such as child in need or child protection plans, or
provision meeting eligible needs set out in an adult care
plan where it is unrelated to the SEN but appropriate to
include in the EHC plan
• See paragraph 9.137 onwards for details of duties on
local authorities to maintain the social care provision in
the EHC plan
(I) Placement • The name and type of the school, maintained nursery
school, post-16 institution or other institution to be
attended by the child or young person and the type of that
institution (or, where the name of a school or other
institution is not specified in the EHC plan, the type of
school or other institution to be attended by the child or
young person)
• These details must be included only in the final EHC
plan, not the draft EHC plan sent to the child’s parent or
to the young person
• See paragraph 9.78 onwards for more details
(J) Personal Budget • This section should provide detailed information on any
(including Personal Budget that will be used to secure provision in
arrangements for the EHC plan
direct payments)
• It should set out the arrangements in relation to direct
payments as required by education, health and social
care regulations
• The special educational needs and outcomes that are to
be met by any direct payment must be specified
(K) Advice and • The advice and information gathered during the EHC
information needs assessment must be set out in appendices to the
EHC plan. There should be a list of this advice and
information
169

===== PAGE 170 =====
Agreeing the health provision in EHC plans
Relevant legislation: Sections 26 and 37 of the Children and Families Act 2014 and
Regulation 12 of the SEND Regulations 2014
9.70 Each CCG will determine which services it will commission to meet the reasonable
health needs of the children and young people with SEN or disabilities for whom it is
responsible. These services should be described in the Local Offer. Relevant local
clinicians, such as community paediatricians, will participate in the development of
the child’s or young person’s EHC plan, advising on the child’s needs and the
provision appropriate to meet them. CCGs must ensure that commissioned services
are mobilised to participate in the development of EHC plans. The CCG as
commissioner will often have a limited involvement in the process (as this will be led
by clinicians from the services they commission) but must ensure that there is
sufficient oversight to provide assurance that the needs of children with SEN are
being met in line with their statutory responsibility. The CCG will have a more direct
role in considering the commissioning of a service that does not appear in the Local
Offer to meet the complex needs of a specific individual, or in agreeing a Personal
Budget.
9.71 The health care provision specified in section G of the EHC plan must be agreed by
the CCG (or where relevant, NHS England) and any health care provision should be
agreed in time to be included in the draft EHC plan sent to the child’s parent or to the
young person. As part of the joint commissioning arrangements, partners must have
clear disagreement resolution procedures where there is disagreement on the
services to be included in an EHC plan.
9.72 For children and young people in youth custody, the arrangements for carrying out
the health part of EHC needs assessments and arranging for the health provision in
EHC plans to be made will be slightly different and further guidance for CCGs and
relevant health commissioners is set out in Chapter 10.
Responsibility for provision
Relevant legislation: Section 21 of the Children and Families Act 2014
9.73 Health or social care provision which educates or trains a child or young person
must be treated as special educational provision and included in Section F of the
EHC plan.
9.74 Decisions about whether health care provision or social care provision should be
treated as special educational provision must be made on an individual basis.
Speech and language therapy and other therapy provision can be regarded as either
education or health care provision, or both. It could therefore be included in an EHC
plan as either educational or health provision. However, since communication is so
170

===== PAGE 171 =====
fundamental in education, addressing speech and language impairment should
normally be recorded as special educational provision unless there are exceptional
reasons for not doing so.
9.75 Agreement should be reached between the local authority and health and social care
partners about where provision will be specified in an EHC plan.
9.76 In cases where health care provision or social care provision is to be treated as
special educational provision, ultimate responsibility for ensuring that the provision is
made rests with the local authority (unless the child’s parent has made suitable
arrangements) and the child’s parent or the young person will have the right to
appeal to the First-tier Tribunal (SEN and Disability) where they disagree with the
provision specified.
The draft EHC plan
Relevant legislation: Section 38 of the Children and Families Act 2014 and
Regulation 13 of the SEND Regulations 2014
9.77 The local authority must send the draft EHC plan (including the appendices
containing the advice and information gathered during the EHC needs assessment)
to the child’s parent or to the young person and give them at least 15 days to give
views and make representations on the content. During this period, the local
authority must make its officers available for a meeting with the child’s parent or the
young person on request if they wish to discuss the content of the draft EHC plan.
When the local authority sends the draft EHC plan to the child’s parent or the young
person the following apply:
• The local authority must notify the child’s parent or the young person that
during this period they can request that a particular school or other
institution, or type of school or other institution, be named in the plan. The
draft plan must not contain the name of the school, maintained nursery
school, post-16 institution or other institution or the type of school or other
institution to be attended by the child or young person (see below)
• The local authority must advise the child’s parent or the young person
where they can find information about the schools and colleges that are
available for the child or young person to attend, for example through the
Local Offer
• The local authority should also seek agreement of any Personal Budget
specified in the draft plan (see paragraph 9.95 onwards for more
information on Personal Budgets)
171

===== PAGE 172 =====
Requests for a particular school, college or other
institution
Relevant legislation: Sections 33 and 39 of the Children and Families Act 2014
9.78 The child’s parent or the young person has the right to request a particular school,
college or other institution of the following type to be named in their EHC plan:
• maintained nursery school
• maintained school and any form of academy or free school (mainstream or
special)
• non-maintained special school
• further education or sixth form college
• independent school or independent specialist colleges (where they have
been approved for this purpose by the Secretary of State and published in
a list available to all parents and young people)
9.79 If a child’s parent or a young person makes a request for a particular nursery, school
or post-16 institution in these groups the local authority must comply with that
preference and name the school or college in the EHC plan unless:
• it would be unsuitable for the age, ability, aptitude or SEN of the child or
young person, or
• the attendance of the child or young person there would be incompatible
with the efficient education of others, or the efficient use of resources
Efficient education means providing for each child or young person a suitable,
appropriate education in terms of their age, ability, aptitude and any special
educational needs they may have. Where a local authority is considering the
appropriateness of an individual institution, ‘others’ is intended to mean the children
and young people with whom the child or young person with an EHC plan will directly
come into contact on a regular day-to-day basis.
9.80 The local authority must consult the governing body, principal or proprietor of the
school or college concerned and consider their comments very carefully before
deciding whether to name it in the child or young person’s EHC plan, sending the
school or college a copy of the draft plan. If another local authority maintains the
school, they too must be consulted.
172

===== PAGE 173 =====
9.81 The local authority must also seek the agreement of the nursery, school or post-16
institution where the draft plan sets out any provision to be delivered on their
premises which is secured through a direct payment. (See paragraph 9.119 onwards
for more information on direct payments). Where this includes a direct payment for
SEN provision, it must include formal written notice of the proposal specifying:
• the name of the child or young person in respect of whom direct payments
are to be made
• the qualifying goods and services which are to be secured by direct
payments
• the proposed amount of direct payments
• any conditions on how the direct payments may be spent
• the dates for payments into a bank account approved by the local authority,
and
• any conditions of receipt that recipients must agree to before any direct
payment can be made
9.82 Advice from schools, colleges and other education or training providers will
contribute to the development of an EHC plan to ensure that it meets the child or
young person’s needs, the outcomes they want to achieve and the aspirations they
are aiming for.
9.83 The nursery, school or college and, where relevant, the other local authority, should
respond within 15 days. Where a nursery, school or college identified at 9.78 above
is named on an EHC plan they must admit the child or young person.
9.84 The child’s parent or the young person may also make representations for places in
non-maintained early years provision or at independent schools or independent
specialist colleges or other post-16 providers that are not on the list mentioned at
9.78 above and the local authority must consider their request. The local authority is
not under the same conditional duty to name the provider but must have regard to
the general principle in section 9 of the Education Act 1996 that children should be
educated in accordance with their parents’ wishes, so long as this is compatible with
the provision of efficient instruction and training and does not mean unreasonable
public expenditure. The local authority should be satisfied that the institution would
admit the child or young person before naming it in a plan since these providers are
not subject to the duty to admit a child or young person even if named in their plan.
173

===== PAGE 174 =====
9.85 Children with EHC plans can attend more than one school under a dual placement.
Dual placements enable children to have support from a mainstream and a special
school. This can help to prepare children for mainstream education and enable
mainstream and special schools to share and develop their expertise in supporting
children with different types of SEN. In order for a child with SEN who is being
supported by a dual placement to be deemed as being educated at a mainstream
school they should spend the majority of their time there.
9.86 Where appropriate, a young person with an EHC plan can attend a dual placement
at an institution within the further education sector and a special post-16 institution.
The local authority should work with the young person, post-16 provider and
independent specialist college to commission such a placement where that will
achieve the best possible outcome for the young person. To be deemed as being
educated in a mainstream further education institution, young people should spend
the majority of their time there.
9.87 The local authority should consider very carefully a request from a parent for a
denominational school, but denominational considerations cannot override the
requirements of the Children and Families Act 2014.
Where no request is made for a particular school or
college or a request for a particular school or college has
not been met
Relevant legislation: Sections 33 and 40 of the Children and Families Act 2014
9.88 Where a parent or young person does not make a request for a particular nursery,
school or college, or does so and their request is not met, the local authority must
specify mainstream provision in the EHC plan unless it would be:
• against the wishes of the parent or young person, or
• incompatible with the efficient education of others
9.89 Mainstream education cannot be refused by a local authority on the grounds that it is
not suitable. A local authority can rely on the exception of incompatibility with the
efficient education of others in relation to maintained nursery schools, mainstream
schools or mainstream post-16 institutions taken as a whole only if it can show that
there are no reasonable steps it could take to prevent that incompatibility. Where a
parent’s or young person’s request for a particular mainstream school or mainstream
post-16 institution has not been met, the school or post-16 institution in question
becomes a possible candidate for consideration by the local authority according to
the conditions in the above paragraph.
174

===== PAGE 175 =====
9.90 Where the local authority considers a particular mainstream place to be incompatible
with the efficient education of others it must demonstrate, in relation to maintained
nursery schools, mainstream schools or mainstream post-16 institutions in its area
taken as a whole, that there are no reasonable steps that it, or the school or college,
could take to prevent that incompatibility. Efficient education means providing for
each child or young person a suitable, appropriate education in terms of their age,
ability, aptitude and any special educational needs they may have. Where a local
authority is considering whether mainstream education is appropriate (as opposed to
considering the appropriateness of an individual institution) the term ‘others’ means
the children or young people with whom the child or young person with an EHC plan
would be likely to come into contact on a regular day-to-day basis. Where a parent or
young person wants mainstream education and it would not be incompatible with the
efficient education of others, the local authority has a duty to secure that provision.
Reasonable steps
9.91 What constitutes a reasonable step will depend on all the circumstances of the
individual case. The following are some of the factors that may be taken into
account:
• Whether taking the step would be effective in removing the incompatibility
• The extent to which it is practical for the early years provider, school,
college or local authority to take the step
• The extent to which steps have already been taken in relation to a
particular child or young person and their effectiveness
• The financial and other resource implications of taking the step, and
• The extent of any disruption that taking the step would cause
9.92 The following are examples of reasonable steps that might be taken in different
circumstances:
• Reasonable steps to ensure that the inclusion of a child with challenging
behaviour in a mainstream primary school setting is not incompatible with
the efficient education of others may include:
addressing factors within the class that may exacerbate the problem,
o
for example using circle time to discuss difficult relationships and
identify constructive responses
teaching the child alternative behaviour, for example by taking quiet
o
time in a specially designated area at times of stress
175

===== PAGE 176 =====
providing the child with a channel of communication, for example use of
o
peer support
using a carefully designed system of behaviour targets drawn up with
o
the child and linked to a reward system which, wherever possible,
involves parents or carers
ensuring that all staff coming into contact with the child are briefed on
o
potential triggers for outbursts and effective ways of heading off trouble
at an early stage
drawing up a contingency plan if there is an outburst in class, for
o
example, identifying with the child a key helper who can be called to
remove the child from the situation, and
ensuring that if there is any possibility that positive handling may need
o
to be used to prevent injury to the child, young person or others or
damage to property, relevant staff have had training in appropriate
techniques, that these have been carefully explained to the child and
that the circumstances in which they will be used are recorded in a
written plan agreed with and signed by the child and their parents or
carers
• Reasonable steps taken to ensure that the inclusion of a child with autistic
spectrum disorder who is distracting and constantly moves around in a
mainstream secondary school is not incompatible with the efficient
education of others may include:
ensuring all possible steps are taken to provide structure and
o
predictability to the child’s day, for example by the use of visual
timetables, careful prior explanation of changes to routines and clear
instructions for tasks
ensuring that the child is taught a means of communicating wants and
o
needs using sign, symbol or spoken language
working with a member of staff on a structured programme of activities
o
designed to prepare him or her for joining in class or group activities,
for example by using ‘social scripts’ to rehearse appropriate behaviour
having an individual workstation within a teaching space where
o
distractions can be kept to a minimum and everything needed for the
work to be done can be organised in sequence, and
176

===== PAGE 177 =====
ensuring that all staff are briefed on the warning signs which may
o
indicate potential behaviour challenge and on a range of activities
which provide effective distraction if used sufficiently early
• Reasonable steps taken to ensure that the inclusion of a young person with
a learning disability who does not use verbal communication in a
mainstream course at a further education college is not incompatible with
the efficient education of others may include:
the involvement of staff from the college’s learning support team in the
o
school-based transition reviews
an orientation period during the summer holidays, to enable the student
o
to find his or her way around the college campus and meet the learning
support staff
opportunities to practise travelling to and from college
o
the development of an individual learning programme outlining longer
o
term outcomes covering all aspects of learning and development, with
shorter term targets to meet the outcomes
supported access to taster sessions over a first year in college
o
a more detailed assessment of the young person’s needs and wishes
o
provided by learning support tutors during a ‘taster’ year
staff development to ensure an understanding of the student’s
o
particular method of communication
use of expertise in access technology to identify appropriate switches
o
or communication boards to facilitate the student’s involvement in an
entry-level course, and
courses normally covered in one year planned over two years to meet
o
the young person’s learning needs
9.93 There may be a range of reasons why it may not always be possible to take
reasonable steps to prevent a mainstream place from being incompatible with the
efficient education of others – for example, where the child or young person’s
behaviour systematically, persistently or significantly threatens the safety and/or
impedes the learning of others.
9.94 A decision not to educate a child or young person in a mainstream setting against
the wishes of the child’s parent or the young person should not be taken lightly. It is
177

===== PAGE 178 =====
important that all decisions are taken on the basis of the circumstances of each case
and in consultation with the parents or young person, taking account of the child or
young person’s views. Local authorities should consider reasonable steps that can
be taken for mainstream schools and mainstream post-16 institutions generally to
provide for children and young people with SEN and disabled children and young
people.
Requesting a Personal Budget
Relevant legislation: Section 49 of the Children and Families Act 2014, the Special
Educational Needs (Personal Budgets) Regulations 2014, the Community Care,
services for Carers and Children’s Services (Direct Payments) Regulations 2009 (the
2009 regulations will be replaced by those made under the Care Act 2014), and the
National Health Service (Direct Payments) Regulations 2013
9.95 A Personal Budget is an amount of money identified by the local authority to deliver
provision set out in an EHC plan where the parent or young person is involved in
securing that provision (see ‘Mechanisms for delivery of a Personal Budget’ below).
9.96 Local authorities must provide information on Personal Budgets as part of the Local
Offer. This should include a policy on Personal Budgets that sets out a description of
the services across education, health and social care that currently lend themselves
to the use of Personal Budgets, how that funding will be made available, and clear
and simple statements of eligibility criteria and the decision-making processes.
9.97 Personal Budgets are optional for the child’s parent or the young person but local
authorities are under a duty to prepare a budget when requested. Local authorities
must provide information about organisations that may be able to provide advice
and assistance to help parents and young people to make informed decisions about
Personal Budgets. Local authorities should use the information on Personal Budgets
set out in the Local Offer to introduce the idea of Personal Budgets to parents and
young people within the person-centred approach described in paragraphs 9.21 to
9.26.
9.98 The child’s parent or the young person has a right to request a Personal Budget,
when the local authority has completed an EHC needs assessment and confirmed
that it will prepare an EHC plan. They may also request a Personal Budget during a
statutory review of an existing EHC plan.
9.99 Personal Budgets should reflect the holistic nature of an EHC plan and can include
funding for special educational, health and social care provision. They should be
focused to secure the provision agreed in the EHC plan and should be designed to
secure the outcomes specified in the EHC plan.
178

===== PAGE 179 =====
9.100 Further resources on Personal Budgets are available through the DfE-funded
‘Making it Personal’ project. This includes guidance for parents, commissioners and
suppliers and is available on the Kids website – a link is provided in the References
section under Chapter 3.
Mechanisms for delivery of a Personal Budget
9.101 There are four ways in which the child’s parent and/or the young person can be
involved in securing provision:
• Direct payments – where individuals receive the cash to contract, purchase
and manage services themselves
• An arrangement – whereby the local authority, school or college holds the
funds and commissions the support specified in the plan (these are
sometimes called notional budgets)
• Third party arrangements – where funds (direct payments) are paid to and
managed by an individual or organisation on behalf of the child’s parent or
the young person
• A combination of the above
Setting and agreeing the Personal Budget
9.102 The child’s parent or the young person should be given an indication of the level of
funding that is likely to be required to make the provision specified, or proposed to be
specified in the EHC plan. An indicative figure can be identified through a resource
allocation or banded funding system. As part of a person-centred approach to the
development of the EHC plan, the local authority should agree the provision to be
made in the plan and help the parent or young person to decide whether they want
to take up a Personal Budget. Local authorities should be clear that any figure
discussed at this stage is indicative and is a tool to support the planning process
including the development of the draft EHC plan. The final allocation of funding
budget must be sufficient to secure the agreed provision specified in the EHC plan
and must be set out as part of that provision.
9.103 Details of the proposed Personal Budget should be included in section J of the draft
EHC plan and, where the proposed budget includes direct payments for special
educational provision, this section must include the SEN and outcomes to be met by
the payment. Local authorities must also provide written notice of the conditions for
receipt of any direct payment for special educational provision and can do this
alongside the draft EHC plan. The child's parent or the young person should confirm
their decision and agreement of the budget. Where appropriate, this must include
their agreement, in writing, of the conditions for receipt of the direct payment,
179

===== PAGE 180 =====
alongside any request for a particular school, college or other institution to be named
in the EHC plan. Where the child's parent or the young person has nominated a
person to receive payments on their behalf, the agreement must come from the
proposed recipient.
9.104 Where a direct payment is proposed for special educational provision, local
authorities must secure the agreement of the early years setting, school or college, if
any of the provision is to be delivered on that institution's premises. Local authorities
should usually do this when they consult the institution about naming it on the child
or young person's EHC plan. The local authority should also seek assurance from
the child's parent, young person or nominee that any person employed by the child's
parent or young person, but working on early years, school or college premises, will
conform to the policies and procedures of that institution and may write such an
assurance into the conditions for receipt of the direct payment.
9.105 Where agreement cannot be reached with the early years setting, school or college,
the local authority must not go ahead with the direct payment. However, they should
continue to work with the child's parent or the young person and the school, college
or early years setting to explore other opportunities for the personalisation of
provision in the EHC plan. Local authorities may wish to discuss the potential for
arrangements whereby the local authority, the early years setting, school or college,
holds a notional budget with a view to involving the child's parent or the young
person in securing the provision. The broader purpose of such arrangements is to
increase the participation of children, their parents and young people in decision-
making in relation to special educational provision
9.106 Local authorities must consider each request for a Personal Budget on its individual
merits and prepare a Personal Budget in each case unless the sum is part of a larger
amount and disaggregation of the funds for the Personal Budget:
• would have an adverse impact on services provided or arranged by the
local authority for other EHC plan holders, or
• where it should not be an efficient use of the local authority’s resources
In these circumstances, the local authority should inform the child’s parent or the
young person of the reasons it is unable to identify a sum of money and work with
them to ensure that services are personalised through other means. Demand from
parents and young people for funds that cannot, at present, be disaggregated
should inform joint commissioning arrangements for greater choice and control (see
Chapter 3, Working together across education, health and care for joint outcomes,
paragraphs 3.38 and 3.39).
180

===== PAGE 181 =====
9.107 If the local authority refuses a request for a direct payment for special educational
provision on the grounds set out in regulations (see paragraphs 9.119 to 9.124
below) the local authority must set out their reasons in writing and inform the child’s
parent or the young person of their right to request a formal review of the decision.
The local authority must consider any subsequent representation made by the
child’s parent or the young person and notify them of the outcome, in writing, setting
out the reasons for their decision.
9.108 Where the disagreement relates to the special educational provision to be secured
through a Personal Budget the child’s parent or the young person can appeal to the
First-tier Tribunal (SEN and Disability), as with any other disagreement about
provision to be specified in an EHC plan.
9.109 Decisions in relation to the health element (Personal Health Budget) remain the
responsibility of the CCG or other health commissioning bodies and where they
decline a request for a direct payment, they must set out the reasons in writing and
provide the opportunity for a formal review. Where more than one body is unable to
meet a request for a direct payment, the local authority and partners should consider
sending a single letter setting out the reasons for the decisions.
Scope of Personal Budgets
9.110 The Personal Budget can include funding from education, health and social care.
However, the scope of that budget will vary depending on the needs of the individual,
the eligibility criteria for the different components and the mechanism for delivery. It
will reflect local circumstances, commissioning arrangements and school preference.
The scope of Personal Budgets should increase over time as local joint
commissioning arrangements provide greater opportunity for choice and control over
local provision.
9.111 Local authority commissioners and their partners should seek to align funding
streams for inclusion in Personal Budgets and are encouraged to establish
arrangements that will allow the development of a single integrated fund from which
a single Personal Budget, covering all three areas of additional and individual
support, can be made available. EHC plans can then set out how this budget is to be
used including the provision to be secured, the outcomes it will deliver and how
health, education and social care needs will be met.
Education
9.112 The special educational provision specified in an EHC plan can include provision
funded from the school’s budget share (or in colleges from their formula funding) and
more specialist provision funded wholly or partly from the local authority’s high needs
funding. It is this latter funding that is used for Personal Budgets, although schools
181

===== PAGE 182 =====
and colleges should be encouraged to personalise the support they provide and they
can choose to contribute their own funding to a Personal Budget (this will usually be
an organised arrangement managed by the setting, but some schools and colleges,
including specialist settings, have made innovative arrangements with young people,
giving them direct (cash) payments).
9.113 High needs funding can also be used to commission services from schools and
colleges, including from special schools. In practice, this will mean the funding from
the local authority’s high needs budget for the SEN element of a Personal Budget
will vary depending on how services are commissioned locally and what schools and
colleges are expected to provide as part of the Local Offer. The child’s parent or the
young person should be made aware that the scope for a Personal Budget varies
depending on their school preference. For example, as part of their core provision,
special schools and colleges make some specialist provision available that is not
normally available at mainstream schools and colleges. The particular choice of a
special school, with integrated specialist provision, might reduce the scope for a
Personal Budget, whereas the choice of a place in a mainstream school that does
not make that particular provision could increase the opportunity for a Personal
Budget.
Health
9.114 Personal Health Budgets for healthcare are not appropriate for all of the aspects of
NHS care an individual may require. Full details of excluded services are set out in
guidance provided by NHS England and include primary medical (i.e. GP services)
and emergency services.
9.115 In principle, other than excluded services a Personal Health Budget could be given
to anyone who needs to receive healthcare funded by the NHS where the benefits of
having the budget for healthcare outweigh any additional costs associated with
having one.
9.116 Since April 2014, everyone receiving NHS Continuing Healthcare (including
children’s continuing care) has had the right to ask for a Personal Health Budget,
including a direct payment. From October 2014 this group will benefit from ‘a right to
have’ a Personal Health Budget.
9.117 The mandate to NHS England sets an objective that from April 2015 Personal Health
Budgets including direct payments should be an option for people with long-term
health needs who could benefit from one. This includes people who use NHS
services outside NHS Continuing Healthcare.
182

===== PAGE 183 =====
Social Care
9.118 The Care Act 2014 mandates, for the first time in law, a Personal Budget as part of
the care and support plan for people over 18 with eligible care and support needs, or
where the local authority decides to meet needs. The Act also clarifies people’s right
to request a direct payment to meet some or all of their care and support needs, and
covers people with and without capacity to request a direct payment. For children
and young people under 18, local authorities are under a duty to offer direct
payments (see paragraph 9.123 below) for services which the local authority may
provide to children with disabilities, or their families, under section 17 of the Children
Act 1989.
Use of direct payments
9.119 Direct payments are cash payments made directly to the child’s parent, the young
person or their nominee, allowing them to arrange provision themselves. They must
be set at a level that will secure the provision specified in the EHC plan. If a direct
payment is not set at a suitable level, it must be reviewed and adjusted. Local
authorities must not make direct payments for the purpose of funding a school place
or post-16 institution.
9.120 Local authority and health commissioning body duties to secure or arrange the
provision specified in EHC plans are discharged through a direct payment only when
the provision has been acquired for, or on behalf of, the child’s parent or the young
person and this has been done in keeping with regulations. Funding must be set at a
level to secure the agreed provision in the EHC plan and meet health needs agreed
in the Personal Health Budget Care Plan (see paragraph 9.124 below for the
additional information that needs to be included in an EHC plan to meet the
requirements for a Care Plan).
9.121 Direct payments for special educational provision, health care and social care
provision are subject to separate regulations. These are:
• The Community Care, services for Carers and Children’s Services (Direct
Payments) Regulations 2009 (the 2009 regulations will be replaced by
those made under the Care Act 2014)
• The National Health Service (Direct Payments) Regulations 2013
• The Special Educational Needs (Personal Budgets) Regulations 2014
9.122 The regulations have many common requirements including those covering consent,
use of nominees, conditions for receipt, monitoring and review of direct payments
and persons to whom direct payments must not be made (such as those subject to
183

===== PAGE 184 =====
certain rehabilitation orders). Detailed arrangements for direct payments should be
set out in section J of the EHC plan.
9.123 Local authorities must offer direct payments for social care services. For both
education and social care the local authority must be satisfied that the person who
receives the direct payments will use them in an appropriate way and that they will
act in the best interests of the child or young person. Regulations governing the use
of direct payments for special educational provision place a number of additional
requirements on both local authorities and parents before a direct payment can be
agreed. These include requirements to consider the impact on other service users
and value for money and to seek agreement from educational establishments where
a service funded by a direct payment is delivered on their premises.
9.124 Direct payments for health require the agreement of a Care Plan between the CCG
and the recipient. This requirement can be fulfilled by sections G and J of the EHC
plan as long as it includes the following information:
• the health needs to be met and the outcomes to be achieved through the
provision in the plan
• the things that the direct payment will be used to purchase, the size of the
direct payment, and how often it will be paid
• the name of the care co-ordinator responsible for managing the Care Plan
• who will be responsible for monitoring the health condition of the person
receiving care
• the anticipated date of the first review, and how it is to be carried out
• the period of notice that will apply if the CCG decides to reduce the amount
of the direct payment
• where necessary, an agreed procedure for discussing and managing any
significant risk, and
• where people lack capacity or are more vulnerable, the plan should
consider safeguarding, promoting liberty and where appropriate set out any
restraint procedures
184

===== PAGE 185 =====
Finalising and maintaining the EHC plan
Relevant legislation: Sections 39, 40 and 43 of the Children and Families Act 2014
and Regulations 13 and 14 of the SEND Regulations 2014
9.125 When changes are suggested to the draft EHC plan by the child’s parent or the
young person and agreed by the local authority, the draft plan should be amended
and issued as the final EHC plan as quickly as possible. The final EHC plan can
differ from the draft EHC plan only as a result of any representations made by the
child’s parent or the young person (including a request for a Personal Budget) and
decisions made about the school or other institution (or type of school or other
institution) to be named in the EHC plan. The local authority must not make any
other changes – if the local authority wishes to make other changes it must re-issue
the draft EHC plan to the child’s parent or the young person (see paragraph 9.77).
The final EHC plan should be signed and dated by the local authority officer
responsible for signing off the final plan.
9.126 Where changes suggested by the child’s parent or the young person are not agreed,
the local authority may still proceed to issue the final EHC plan. In either case the
local authority must notify the child’s parent or the young person of their right to
appeal to the Tribunal and the time limit for doing so, of the requirement for them to
consider mediation should they wish to appeal, and the availability of information,
advice and support and disagreement resolution services. The local authority should
also notify the child’s parent or the young person how they can appeal the health and
social care provision in the EHC plan.
9.127 The child’s parent or the young person may appeal to the Tribunal against the
description of SEN in the EHC plan, the special educational provision, and the
school or other provider named, or the fact that no school or other provider is named.
9.128 Mediation and appeals for children and young people whose EHC plans are finalised
while they remain in custody are covered in Chapter 10.
9.129 As well as the child’s parent or the young person, the final EHC plan must also be
issued to the governing body, proprietor or principal of any school, college or other
institution named in the EHC plan, and to the relevant CCG (or where relevant, NHS
England).
9.130 Where a nursery, school or college (of a type identified in paragraph 9.78) is named
in an EHC plan, they must admit the child or young person. The headteacher or
principal of the school, college or other institution named in the EHC plan should
ensure that those teaching or working with the child or young person are aware of
their needs and have arrangements in place to meet them. Institutions should also
ensure that teachers and lecturers monitor and review the child or young person’s
185

===== PAGE 186 =====
progress during the course of a year. Formal reviews of the EHC plan must take
place at least annually. If a child or young person’s SEN change, the local authority
should hold a review as soon as possible to ensure that provision specified in the
EHC plan is appropriate.
Maintaining special educational provision in EHC plans
Relevant legislation: Section 42 of the Children and Families Act 2014
9.131 When an EHC plan is maintained for a child or young person the local authority
must secure the special educational provision specified in the plan. If a local
authority names an independent school or independent college in the plan as special
educational provision it must also meet the costs of the fees, including any boarding
and lodging where relevant.
9.132 The local authority is relieved of its duty to secure the special educational provision
in the EHC plan, including securing a place in a school or college named in the plan,
if the child’s parent or the young person has made suitable alternative arrangements
for special educational provision to be made, say in an independent school or
college or at home.
9.133 Where the child’s parent or the young person makes alternative arrangements, the
local authority must satisfy itself that those arrangements are suitable before it is
relieved of its duty to secure the provision. It can conclude that those arrangements
are suitable only if there is a realistic possibility of them being funded for a
reasonable period of time. If it is satisfied, the authority need not name its nominated
school or college in the EHC plan and may specify only the type of provision. This is
to avoid the school or other institution having to keep a place free that the child’s
parent or the young person has no intention of taking up.
9.134 If the local authority is not satisfied that the alternative arrangements made by the
child’s parent or the young person are suitable, it could either conclude that the
arrangements are not suitable and name another appropriate school or college, or it
could choose to assist the child’s parent or the young person in making their
arrangements suitable, including through a financial contribution. But the local
authority would be under no obligation to meet the costs of those arrangements.
9.135 Where the child’s parent or the young person makes suitable alternative
arrangements for educational provision the health commissioning body is still
responsible for arranging the health care specified in the child or young person’s
EHC plan. If the child’s parent or the young person makes alternative arrangements
for health care provision then the health commissioning body would need to satisfy
itself that those arrangements are suitable. If the arrangements are not suitable the
health commissioning body would arrange the provision specified in the plan or, if
186

===== PAGE 187 =====
they felt it appropriate, assist the child’s parent or the young person in making their
own arrangements suitable.
9.136 These arrangements ensure that local authorities meet their fundamental
responsibility to ensure that children and young people with EHC plans get the
support they need whilst enabling flexibility to accommodate alternative
arrangements made by the child’s parent or the young person.
Maintaining social care provision in EHC plans
9.137 For social care provision specified in the plan, existing duties on social care services
to assess and provide for the needs of disabled children and young people under the
Children Act 1989 continue to apply. Where the local authority decides it is
necessary to make provision for a disabled child or young person under 18 pursuant
to Section 2 of the Chronically Sick and Disabled Person Act (CSDPA) 1970, the
local authority must identify which provision is made under section 2 of the CSDPA.
The local authority must specify that provision in section H1 of the EHC plan. It
must secure that provision because under Section 2 of the CSDPA there is a duty to
provide the services assessed by the local authority as being needed.
9.138 Where the young person is over 18, the care element of the EHC plan will usually be
provided by adult services. Under the Care Act 2014, local authorities must meet
eligible needs set out in an adult care and support plan (as set out in the Care Act
2014). Local authorities should explain how the adult care and support system
works, and support young people in making the transition to adult services. Local
authorities should have in place arrangements to ensure that young people with
social care needs have every opportunity to lead as independent a life as possible
and that they are not disadvantaged by the move from children’s to adult services.
9.139 However, where it will benefit a young person with an EHC plan, local authorities
have the power to continue to provide children’s services past a young person’s 18th
birthday for as long as is deemed necessary. This will enable the move to adult
services to take place at a time that avoids other key changes in the young person’s
life such as the move from special school sixth form to college.
9.140 The Care Act 2014 requires local authorities to ensure there is no gap in support
while an individual makes the transition from children’s to adult services on or after
their 18th birthday. Children’s services must be maintained until a decision on adult
provision is reached and where it is agreed that adult services will be provided,
children’s services must continue until the adult support begins. Young people will
also be able to request an assessment for adult care in advance of their 18th
birthday so they can plan ahead knowing what support will be received. See Chapter
8 for further details on young adults over 18 with social care needs, and Chapter 10
for further details on children and young people with social care needs.
187

===== PAGE 188 =====
Maintaining health provision in EHC plans
Relevant legislation: Section 42 of the Children and Families Act 2014
9.141 For health care provision specified in the EHC plan, the CCG (or where relevant
NHS England) must ensure that it is made available to the child or young person.
The joint arrangements underpinning the plan will include agreement between the
partners of their respective responsibilities for funding the arrangements, to ensure
that the services specified are commissioned. CCGs will need therefore to satisfy
themselves that the arrangements they have in place for participating in the
development of EHC plans include a mechanism for agreeing the health provision,
which would usually be delegated to the relevant health professionals commissioned
by the CCG. CCGs may however wish to have more formal oversight arrangements
for all EHC plans to which they are a party.
Specific age ranges
All children under compulsory school age
9.142 Children under compulsory school age are considered to have SEN if they have a
learning difficulty or disability which calls for special educational provision to be
made and when they reach compulsory school age are likely to have greater
difficulty in learning than their peers, or have a disability which prevents or hinders
them from making use of the facilities that are generally provided. There is an
additional precautionary consideration, that they are considered to have a learning
difficulty or disability if they would be likely to have a learning difficulty or disability
when they are of compulsory school age if no special educational provision were
made for them. The majority of children with SEN are likely to receive special
educational provision through the services set out in the Local Offer. A local authority
must conduct an EHC needs assessment for a child under compulsory school age
when it considers it may need to make special educational provision in accordance
with an EHC plan (see paragraphs 9.11 to 9.19 for details of the process for deciding
whether to undertake an EHC needs assessment). Where an EHC plan may be
needed, the local authority should involve fully the child’s parent and any early years
or school setting attended by the child in making decisions about undertaking an
EHC needs assessment and whether provision may need to be made in accordance
with an EHC plan.
Children aged under 2
9.143 Parents, health services, childcare settings, Sure Start Children’s Centres or others
may identify young children as having or possibly having SEN. For most children
under two whose SEN are identified early, their needs are likely to be best met from
locally available services, particularly the health service, and for disabled children,
social care services provided under Section 17 of the Children Act 1989. The Local
188

===== PAGE 189 =====
Offer should set out how agencies will work together to provide integrated support for
young children with SEN, and how services will be planned and commissioned jointly
to meet local needs.
9.144 For very young children local authorities should consider commissioning the
provision of home-based programmes such as Portage, or peripatetic services for
children with hearing or vision impairment. Parents should be fully involved in making
decisions about the nature of the help and support that they would like to receive –
some may prefer to attend a centre or to combine home-based with centre-based
support. Children and their parents may also benefit from Early Support, which
provides materials and resources on co-ordinated support. Further information about
the programme can be found on the GOV.UK website – a link is given in the
References section under Chapter 2.
9.145 Special educational provision for a child aged under two means educational
provision of any kind. Children aged under two are likely to need special educational
provision in accordance with an EHC plan where they have particularly complex
needs affecting learning, development and health and are likely to require a high
level of special educational provision which would not normally be available in
mainstream settings. A decision to issue an EHC plan may be made in order to allow
access to a particular specialist service that cannot otherwise be obtained, such as
home-based teaching. The factors a local authority should take into account in
deciding whether an EHC plan is necessary are set out in paragraphs 9.53 to 9.56.
Children aged 2 to 5
9.146 Where young children are attending an early years setting, the local authority should
seek advice from the setting in making decisions about undertaking an EHC needs
assessment and preparing an EHC plan. Local authorities should consider whether
the child’s current early years setting can support the child’s SEN, or whether they
need to offer additional support through an EHC plan, which may include a
placement in an alternative early years setting. Chapter 5 sets out more detail on
SEN support for children in early years settings.
9.147 Where a child is not attending an early years setting the local authority should collect
as much information as possible before deciding whether to assess. The local
authority will then consider the evidence and decide whether the child’s difficulties or
developmental delays are likely to require special educational provision through an
EHC plan. The local authority must decide this in consultation with the child’s parent,
taking account of the potential for special educational provision made early to
prevent or reduce later need.
9.148 Following an assessment, the local authority must decide whether to make special
educational provision in accordance with an EHC plan. For children within one to two
189

===== PAGE 190 =====
years of starting compulsory education who are likely to need an EHC plan in
primary school, it will often be appropriate to prepare an EHC plan during this period
so the EHC plan is in place to support the transition to primary school.
9.149 Parents of children under compulsory school age can ask for a particular maintained
nursery school to be named in their child’s plan. The local authority must name the
school unless it would be unsuitable for the age, ability, aptitude or SEN of the child,
or the attendance of the child there would be incompatible with the efficient
education of others or the efficient use of resources. The child’s parents may also
make representations in favour of an independent, private or voluntary early years
setting for their child. If the local authority considers such provision appropriate, it is
entitled to specify this in the plan and if it does, it must fund the provision. However,
it cannot require an independent, private or voluntary setting to admit a child, unless
the setting agrees. The local authority should ensure that parents have full
information on the range of provision available within the authority’s area and may
wish to offer parents the opportunity to visit such provision.
Young people aged 19 to 25
9.150 It is important to ensure young people are prepared effectively for adulthood and the
decision to provide or continue an EHC plan should take this into account, including
the need to be ambitious for young people (see paragraph 8.51). The outcomes
specified in the EHC plan should reflect the need to be ambitious, showing how they
will enable the young person to make progress towards their aspirations. The local
authority, in collaboration with the young person, his or her parent where
appropriate, and relevant professionals should use the annual review process to
consider whether special educational provision provided through an EHC plan will
continue to enable young people to progress towards agreed outcomes that will
prepare them for adulthood and help them meet their aspirations.
Young people turning 19 who have EHC plans
9.151 In line with preparing young people for adulthood, a local authority must not cease
an EHC plan simply because a young person is aged 19 or over. Young people with
EHC plans may need longer in education or training in order to achieve their
outcomes and make an effective transition into adulthood. However, this position
does not mean that there is an automatic entitlement to continued support at age 19
or an expectation that those with an EHC plan should all remain in education until
age 25. A local authority may cease a plan for a 19- to 25-year-old if it decides that it
is no longer necessary for the EHC plan to be maintained. Such circumstances
include where the young person no longer requires the special educational provision
specified in their EHC plan. In deciding that the special educational provision is no
longer required, the local authority must have regard to whether the educational or
190

===== PAGE 191 =====
training outcomes specified in the plan have been achieved (see the section on
Outcomes, paragraphs 9.64 to 9.69).
9.152 The local authority should also consider whether remaining in education or training
would enable the young person to progress and achieve those outcomes, and
whether the young person wants to remain in education or training so they can
complete or consolidate their learning. In both cases, this should include
consideration of access to provision that will help them prepare for adulthood. Young
people who no longer need to remain in formal education or training will not require
special educational provision to be made for them through an EHC plan.
Reviewing and re-assessing EHC plans
9.153 Where an EHC plan will still be maintained for a young person aged 19 or over, it
must continue to be reviewed at least annually. The plan must continue to contain
outcomes which should enable the young person to complete their education and
training successfully and so move on to the next stage of their lives, including
employment or higher education and independent living. This will happen at different
stages for individual young people and EHC plans extended beyond age 19 will not
all need to remain in place until age 25.
9.154 Local authorities should ensure that young people are given clear information about
what support they can receive, including information about continuing study in adult
or higher education, and support for health and social care, when their plan ceases.
See paragraphs 9.199 to 9.210 for guidance on the process for ceasing an EHC
plan.
New requests for EHC needs assessments for 19- to 25-year-olds
9.155 Young people who do not already have an EHC plan continue to have the right to
request an assessment of their SEN at any point prior to their 25th birthday (unless
an assessment has been carried out in the previous six months).
9.156 Where such a request is made, or the young person is otherwise brought to the
attention of the local authority as being someone who may have SEN, the local
authority must follow the guidance earlier in this chapter for carrying out EHC needs
assessments. In addition, when making decisions about whether a plan needs to be
made for a 19- to 25-year-old, local authorities must consider whether the young
person requires additional time, in comparison to the majority of others of the same
age who do not have SEN, to complete his or her education or training.
191

===== PAGE 192 =====
Transfer of EHC plans
Relevant legislation: Section 47 of the Children and Families Act 2014 and
Regulations 15 and 16 of the SEND Regulations 2014
Transfers between local authorities
9.157 Where a child or young person moves to another local authority, the ‘old’ authority
must transfer the EHC plan to the ‘new’ authority. The old authority must transfer
the EHC plan to the new authority on the day of the move, unless the following
condition applies. Where the old authority has not been provided with 15 working
days’ notice of the move, the old authority must transfer the EHC plan within 15
working days beginning with the day on which it did become aware.
9.158 The old authority should also transfer any opinion they have received under the
Disabled Persons (Services, Consultation and Representation) Act 1986 that the
child or young person is disabled. Upon the transfer of the EHC plan, the new
authority becomes responsible for maintaining the plan and for securing the special
educational provision specified in it.
9.159 The requirement for the child or young person to attend the educational institution
specified in the EHC plan continues after the transfer. However, where attendance
would be impractical, the new authority must place the child or young person
temporarily at an appropriate educational institution other than that specified – for
example, where the distance between the child or young person’s new home and the
educational institution would be too great – until the EHC plan is formally amended.
The new authority may not decline to pay the fees or otherwise maintain the child at
an independent or non-maintained special school or a boarding school named in an
EHC plan unless and until they have amended the EHC plan.
9.160 The new authority may, on the transfer of the EHC plan, bring forward the
arrangements for the review of the plan, and may conduct a new EHC needs
assessment regardless of when the previous EHC needs assessment took place.
This will be particularly important where the plan includes provision that is secured
through the use of a direct payment, where local variations may mean that
arrangements in the original EHC plan are no longer appropriate. The new authority
must tell the child’s parent or the young person, within six weeks of the date of
transfer, when they will review the plan (as below) and whether they propose to
make an EHC needs assessment.
192

===== PAGE 193 =====
9.161 The new authority must review the plan before one of the following deadlines,
whichever is the later:
• within 12 months of the plan being made or being previously reviewed by
the old authority, or
• within 3 months of the plan being transferred
9.162 Some children and young people will move between local authority areas while they
are being assessed for a plan. The new authority in such cases should decide
whether it needs to carry out an EHC needs assessment themselves and it must
decide whether to undertake an EHC needs assessment if it receives a request from
the child’s parent or the young person. The new authority should take account of the
fact that the old authority decided to carry out an EHC needs assessment when
making its decision. If it decides to do so then it should use the information already
gathered as part of its own EHC needs assessment. Depending on how far the
assessment had progressed, this information should help the new authority complete
the assessment more quickly than it would otherwise have done.
Transfers between clinical commissioning groups
9.163 Where the child or young person’s move between local authority areas also results in
a new CCG becoming responsible for the child or young person, the old CCG must
notify the new CCG on the day of the move or, where it has not become aware of the
move at least 15 working days prior to that move, within 15 working days beginning
on the day on which it did become aware. Where for any other reason a new CCG
becomes responsible for the child or young person, for example on a change of GP
or a move within the local authority’s area, the old CCG must notify the new CCG
within 15 working days of becoming aware of the move. Where it is not practicable
for the new CCG to secure the health provision specified in the EHC plan, the new
CCG must, within 15 working days of becoming aware of the change of CCG,
request the (new) local authority to make an EHC needs assessment or review the
EHC plan. The (new) local authority must comply with any request.
9.164 For looked after children moving between local authorities, the old CCG retains
responsibility for provision in the new local authority – for example, commissioning
the provision from the new CCG as required.
9.165 Where a child or young person with an EHC plan moves to Northern Ireland, Wales
or Scotland, the old authority should send a copy of the child or young person’s EHC
plan to the new authority or board, although there will be no obligation on the new
authority or board to continue to maintain it.
193

===== PAGE 194 =====
Reviewing an EHC plan
Relevant legislation: Section 44 of the Children and Families Act 2014 and
Regulations 2, 18, 19, 20, and 21 of the SEND Regulations 2014
9.166 EHC plans should be used to actively monitor children and young people’s progress
towards their outcomes and longer term aspirations. They must be reviewed by the
local authority as a minimum every 12 months. Reviews must focus on the child or
young person’s progress towards achieving the outcomes specified in the EHC plan.
The review must also consider whether these outcomes and supporting targets
remain appropriate.
9.167 Reviews should also:
• gather and assess information so that it can be used by early years
settings, schools or colleges to support the child or young person’s
progress and their access to teaching and learning
• review the special educational provision made for the child or young person
to ensure it is being effective in ensuring access to teaching and learning
and good progress
• review the health and social care provision made for the child or young
person and its effectiveness in ensuring good progress towards outcomes
• consider the continuing appropriateness of the EHC plan in the light of the
child or young person’s progress during the previous year or changed
circumstances and whether changes are required including any changes to
outcomes, enhanced provision, change of educational establishment or
whether the EHC plan should be discontinued
• set new interim targets for the coming year and where appropriate, agree
new outcomes
• review any interim targets set by the early years provider, school or college
or other education provider
9.168 Reviews must be undertaken in partnership with the child and their parent or the
young person, and must take account of their views, wishes and feelings, including
their right to request a Personal Budget.
9.169 The first review must be held within 12 months of the date when the EHC plan was
issued, and then within 12 months of any previous review, and the local authority’s
decision following the review meeting must be notified to the child’s parent or the
young person within four weeks of the review meeting (and within 12 months of the
194

===== PAGE 195 =====
date of issue of the EHC plan or previous review). Professionals across education,
health and care must co-operate with local authorities during reviews. The review of
the EHC plan should include the review of any existing Personal Budget
arrangements including the statutory requirement to review any arrangements for
direct payments. For looked after children the annual review should, if possible and
appropriate, coincide with one of the reviews in their Care Plan and in particular the
personal education plan (PEP) element of the Care Plan.
9.170 Local authorities must also review and maintain an EHC plan when a child or young
person has been released from custody. The responsible local authority must
involve the child’s parent or the young person in reviewing whether the EHC plan still
reflects their needs accurately and should involve the youth offending team in
agreeing appropriate support and opportunities.
9.171 When reviewing an EHC plan for a young person aged over 18, the local authority
must have regard to whether the educational or training outcomes specified in the
EHC plan have been achieved.
9.172 The local authority should provide a list of children and young people who will require
a review of their EHC plan that term to all headteachers and principals of schools,
colleges and other institutions attended by children or young people with EHC plans,
at least two weeks before the start of each term. The local authority should also
provide a list of all children and young people with EHC plan reviews in the
forthcoming term to the CCG (or, where relevant, NHS England) and local authority
officers responsible for social care for children and young people with SEN or
disabilities. This will enable professionals to plan attendance at review meetings
and/or provide advice or information about the child or young person where
necessary. These lists should also indicate which reviews must be focused on
transition and preparation for adulthood.
Reviews where a child or young person attends a school or other
institution
9.173 As part of the review, the local authority and the school, further education college or
section 41 approved institution attended by the child or young person must co-
operate to ensure a review meeting takes place. This includes attending the review
when requested to do so. The local authority can require the following types of
school to convene and hold the meeting on the local authority’s behalf:
• maintained schools
• maintained nursery schools
• academy schools
195

===== PAGE 196 =====
• alternative provision academies
• pupil referral units
• non-maintained special schools
• independent educational institutions approved under Section 41 of the
Children and Families Act 2014
9.174 Local authorities can request (but not require) that the early years setting, further
education college or other post-16 institution convene and hold the meeting on their
behalf. There may be a requirement on the post-16 institution to do so as part of the
contractual arrangements agreed when the local authority commissioned and funded
the placement.
9.175 In most cases, reviews should normally be held at the educational institution
attended by the child or young person. Reviews are generally most effective when
led by the educational institution. They know the child or young person best, will
have the closest contact with them and their family and will have the clearest
information about progress and next steps. Reviews led by the educational institution
will engender the greatest confidence amongst the child, young person and their
family. There may be exceptional circumstances where it will be appropriate for the
review meeting to be held by the local authority in a different location, for example
where a young person attends programmes of study at more than one institution.
9.176 The following requirements apply to reviews where a child or young person attends a
school or other institution:
• The child’s parents or young person, a representative of the school or other
institution attended, a local authority SEN officer, a health service
representative and a local authority social care representative must be
invited and given at least two weeks’ notice of the date of the meeting.
Other individuals relevant to the review should also be invited, including
youth offending teams and job coaches where relevant
• The school (or, for children and young people attending another institution,
the local authority) must seek advice and information about the child or
young person prior to the meeting from all parties invited, and send any
advice and information gathered to all those invited at least two weeks
before the meeting
• The meeting must focus on the child or young person’s progress towards
achieving the outcomes specified in the EHC plan, and on what changes
might need to be made to the support that is provided to help them achieve
196

===== PAGE 197 =====
those outcomes, or whether changes are needed to the outcomes
themselves. Children, parents and young people should be supported to
engage fully in the review meeting
• The school (or, for children and young people attending another institution,
the local authority) must prepare and send a report of the meeting to
everyone invited within two weeks of the meeting. The report must set out
recommendations on any amendments required to the EHC plan, and
should refer to any difference between the school or other institution’s
recommendations and those of others attending the meeting
• Within four weeks of the review meeting, the local authority must decide
whether it proposes to keep the EHC plan as it is, amend the plan, or cease
to maintain the plan, and notify the child’s parent or the young person and
the school or other institution attended
• If the plan needs to be amended, the local authority should start the
process of amendment without delay (see paragraph 9.193 onwards)
• If the local authority decides not to amend the plan or decides to cease to
maintain it, they must notify the child’s parent or the young person of their
right to appeal that decision and the time limits for doing so, of the
requirements for them to consider mediation should they wish to appeal,
and the availability of information, advice and support and disagreement
resolution services
Reviews where a child or young person does not attend a school or
other institution
9.177 The following requirements apply to review meetings where a child or young person
does not attend a school or other institution:
• The child’s parent or the young person, a local authority SEN officer, a
health service representative and a local authority social care
representative must be invited and given at least two weeks’ notice of the
date of the meeting. Other individuals relevant to the review should also be
invited, including youth offending teams and job coaches where relevant,
and any other person whose attendance the local authority considers
appropriate
• The local authority must seek advice and information about the child or
young person prior to the meeting from all parties invited and send any
advice and information gathered to all those invited at least two weeks
before the meeting
197

===== PAGE 198 =====
• The meeting must focus on the child or young person’s progress towards
achieving the outcomes specified in the EHC plan, and on what changes
might need to be made to the support provided to help them achieve those
outcomes, or whether changes are needed to the outcomes themselves.
Children, parents and young people should be supported to engage fully in
the review meeting
• The local authority must prepare and send a report of the meeting to
everyone invited within two weeks of the meeting. The report must set out
recommendations on any amendments required to the EHC plan, and
should refer to any difference between the local authority’s
recommendations, and those of others attending the meeting
• Within four weeks of the review meeting, the local authority must decide
whether it proposes to keep the plan as it is, amend the plan, or cease to
maintain the plan, and notify the child’s parent or the young person
• If the plan needs to be amended, the local authority should start the
process of amendment without delay (see paragraph 9.193 onwards)
• If the local authority decides not to amend the plan or decides to cease to
maintain it, they must notify the child’s parent or young person of their right
to appeal that decision and the time limit for doing so, of the requirement for
them to consider mediation should they wish to appeal, and the availability
of information, advice and support, and disagreement resolution services
Reviews of EHC plans for children aged 0 to 5
9.178 Local authorities should consider reviewing an EHC plan for a child under five at
least every three to six months to ensure that the provision continues to be
appropriate. Such reviews would complement the duty to carry out a review at least
annually but may be streamlined and not necessarily require the attendance of the
full range of professionals, depending on the needs of the child. The child’s parent
must be fully consulted on any proposed changes to the EHC plan and made aware
of their right to appeal to the Tribunal.
Transfer between phases of education
9.179 An EHC plan must be reviewed and amended in sufficient time prior to a child or
young person moving between key phases of education, to allow for planning for
and, where necessary, commissioning of support and provision at the new institution.
The review and any amendments must be completed by 15 February in the calendar
year of the transfer at the latest for transfers into or between schools. The key
transfers are:
198

===== PAGE 199 =====
• early years provider to school
• infant school to junior school
• primary school to middle school
• primary school to secondary school, and
• middle school to secondary school
9.180 For young people moving from secondary school to a post-16 institution or
apprenticeship, the review and any amendments to the EHC plan – including
specifying the post-16 provision and naming the institution – must be completed by
the 31 March in the calendar year of the transfer.
9.181 For young people moving between post-16 institutions, the review process should
normally be completed by 31 March where a young person is expected to transfer to
a new institution in the new academic year. However, transfers between post-16
institutions may take place at different times of the year and the review process
should take account of this. In all cases, where it is proposed that a young person is
to transfer between one post-16 institution and another within the following 12
months, the local authority must review and amend, where necessary, the young
person’s EHC plan at least five months before the transfer takes place.
9.182 In some cases, young people may not meet the entry requirements for their chosen
course or change their minds about what they want to do after the 31 March or five-
month deadline. Where this is the case, local authorities should review the EHC plan
with the young person as soon as possible, to ensure that alternative options are
agreed and new arrangements are in place as far in advance of the start date as
practicable.
9.183 Note: For those moving from secondary school to a post-16 institution or
apprenticeship starting in September 2015, any amendments to the EHC plan –
including specifying the post-16 provision and naming the institution – must be
completed by 31 May 2015. For those moving between post-16 institutions at other
times of year prior to March 2016, these amendments must be made three months
before the transfer takes place. Thereafter, the deadlines set out above must be
adhered to in all cases.
Preparing for adulthood in reviews
9.184 All reviews taking place from Year 9 at the latest and onwards must include a focus
on preparing for adulthood, including employment, independent living and
participation in society. This transition planning must be built into the EHC plan and
where relevant should include effective planning for young people moving from
199

===== PAGE 200 =====
children’s to adult care and health services. It is particularly important in these
reviews to seek and to record the views, wishes and feelings of the child or young
person. The review meeting organiser should invite representatives of post-16
institutions to these review meetings, particularly where the child or young person
has expressed a desire to attend a particular institution. Review meetings taking
place in Year 9 should have a particular focus on considering options and choices for
the next phase of education.
9.185 As the young person is nearing the end of their time in formal education and the plan
is likely to be ceased within the next 12 months, the annual review should consider
good exit planning. Support, provision and outcomes should be agreed that will
ensure the young person is supported to make a smooth transition to whatever they
will be doing next – for example, moving on to higher education, employment,
independent living or adult care. For further guidance on preparing for adulthood
reviews, see Chapter 8, Preparing for adulthood from the earliest years.
Re-assessments of EHC plans
Relevant legislation: Section 44 of the Children and Families Act 2014 and
Regulations 23, 24, 25, 26 and 27 of the SEND Regulations 2014
9.186 The review process will enable changes to be made to an EHC plan so it remains
relevant to the needs of the child or young person and the desired outcomes. There
may be occasions when a re-assessment becomes appropriate, particularly when a
child or young person’s needs change significantly.
Requesting a re-assessment
9.187 Local authorities must conduct a re-assessment of a child or young person’s EHC
plan if a request is made by the child’s parent or the young person, or the governing
body, proprietor or principal of the educational institution attended by the child or
young person, or the CCG (or NHS England where relevant). A local authority may
also decide to initiate a re-assessment without a request if it thinks one is necessary.
A re-assessment may be necessary when a young person with care support
specified in their EHC plan turns 18. Adult care services will need to carry out an
assessment to identify what support adult services may need to provide, and ensure
the assessment is timely so that services are in place when needed.
9.188 A local authority can refuse a request for a re-assessment (from the child’s parent,
young person or educational institution attended) if less than 6 months have passed
since the last EHC needs assessment was conducted. However the local authority
can re-assess sooner than this if they think it is necessary. A local authority may also
decide to refuse a request for re-assessment (from the child’s parent, young person
or educational institution attended) if it thinks that a further EHC needs assessment
200

===== PAGE 201 =====
is not necessary, for example because it considers the child or young person’s
needs have not changed significantly.
9.189 When deciding whether to re-assess an EHC plan for a young person aged 19 or
over, the local authority must have regard to whether the educational or training
outcomes specified in the EHC plan have been achieved.
9.190 The local authority must notify the child’s parent or the young person of its decision
as to whether or not it will undertake a re-assessment within 15 calendar days of
receiving the request to re-assess. If the local authority decides not to re-assess, it
must notify the child’s parent or the young person of their right to appeal that
decision and the time limit for doing so, of the requirement for them to consider
mediation should they wish to appeal and the availability of information, advice and
support and disagreement resolution services.
The re-assessment process
9.191 The process for re-assessment will be the same as the process for a first
assessment (once the decision to carry out an assessment has been taken).
Re-assessments must follow the same process as for the first EHC needs
assessment and drawing up of the EHC plan, set out earlier in this chapter, with the
same timescales and rights of appeal for the child’s parent or the young person.
9.192 The overall maximum timescale for a re-assessment is 14 weeks from the decision
to re-assess to the issuing of the final EHC plan, subject to the exemptions set out in
paragraph 9.42. However, the local authority must aim to complete the process as
soon as practicable. Following a re-assessment, the EHC plan must be reviewed
within 12 months of the date that the finalised EHC plan is sent to the child’s parent
or the young person and subsequently reviewed every twelve months from the date
the EHC plan was last reviewed.
Amending an existing plan
Relevant legislation: Sections 37 and 44 of the Children and Families Act 2014 and
Regulations 22 and 28 of the SEND Regulations 2014
9.193 This section applies to amendments to an existing EHC plan following a review, or at
any other time a local authority proposes to amend an EHC plan other than as part
of a re-assessment. EHC plans are not expected to be amended on a very frequent
basis. However, an EHC plan may need to be amended at other times where, for
example, there are changes in health or social care provision resulting from minor or
specific changes in the child or young person’s circumstances, but where a full
review or re-assessment is not necessary.
201

===== PAGE 202 =====
9.194 Where the local authority proposes to amend an EHC plan, it must send the child’s
parent or the young person a copy of the existing (non-amended) plan and an
accompanying notice providing details of the proposed amendments, including
copies of any evidence to support the proposed changes. The child’s parent or the
young person should be informed that they may request a meeting with the local
authority to discuss the proposed changes.
9.195 The parent or young person must be given at least 15 calendar days to comment
and make representations on the proposed changes, including requesting a
particular school or other institution be named in the EHC plan, in accordance with
paragraphs 9.78 to 9.94 of this chapter.
9.196 Following representations from the child’s parent or the young person, if the local
authority decides to continue to make amendments, it must issue the amended EHC
plan as quickly as possible and within 8 weeks of the original amendment notice. If
the local authority decides not to make the amendments, it must notify the child’s
parent or the young person, explaining why, within the same time limit.
9.197 When the EHC plan is amended, the new plan should state that it is an amended
version of the EHC plan and the date on which it was amended, as well as the date
of the original plan. Additional advice and information, such as the minutes of a
review meeting and accompanying reports which contributed to the decision to
amend the plan, should be appended in the same way as advice received during the
original EHC needs assessment. The amended EHC plan should make clear which
parts have been amended. Where an EHC plan is amended, the following review
must be held within 12 months of the date of issue of the original EHC plan or
previous review (not 12 months from the date the amended EHC plan is issued).
9.198 When sending the final amended EHC plan, the local authority must notify the
child’s parent or the young person of their right to appeal and the time limit for doing
so, of the requirement for them to consider mediation should they wish to appeal,
and the availability of information, advice and support and disagreement resolution
services.
Ceasing an EHC plan
Relevant legislation: Section 45 of the Children and Families Act 2014 and
Regulations 29, 30 and 31 of the SEND Regulations 2014
9.199 A local authority may cease to maintain an EHC plan only if it determines that it is no
longer necessary for the plan to be maintained, or if it is no longer responsible for the
child or young person. As set out in the Introduction (paragraph xi.), the legal
definition of when a child or young person requires an EHC plan remains the same
as that for a statement under the Education Act 1996. The circumstances in which a
202

===== PAGE 203 =====
statement can be ceased or not replaced with an EHC plan during the transition
period are the same as that for ceasing an EHC plan.
9.200 The circumstances where a local authority may determine that it is no longer
necessary for the EHC plan to be maintained include where the child or young
person no longer requires the special educational provision specified in the EHC
plan. When deciding whether a young person aged 19 or over no longer needs the
special educational provision specified in the EHC plan, a local authority must take
account of whether the education or training outcomes specified in the EHC plan
have been achieved. Local authorities must not cease to maintain the EHC plan
simply because the young person is aged 19 or over.
9.201 The circumstances where a local authority is no longer responsible for the child or
young person include where any of the following conditions apply (subject to
paragraphs 9.202 and 9.203 below:
• A young person aged 16 or over leaves education to take up paid
employment (including employment with training but excluding
apprenticeships)
• The young person enters higher education
• A young person aged 18 or over leaves education and no longer wishes to
engage in further learning
• The child or young person has moved to another local authority area
9.202 Where a young person of compulsory school or participation age – i.e. under the age
of 18 – is excluded from their education or training setting or leaves voluntarily, the
local authority must not cease their EHC plan, unless it decides that it is no longer
necessary for special educational provision to be made for the child or young person
in accordance with an EHC plan. The focus of support should be to re-engage the
young person in education or training as soon as possible and the local authority
must review the EHC plan and amend it as appropriate to ensure that the young
person continues to receive education or training.
9.203 Where a young person aged 18 or over leaves education or training before the end
of their course, the local authority must not cease to maintain the EHC plan unless it
has reviewed the young person’s EHC plan to determine whether the young person
wishes to return to education or training, either at the educational institution specified
in the EHC plan or somewhere else. If the young person does wish to return to
education or training, and the local authority thinks it is appropriate, then the local
authority must amend the EHC plan as necessary and it must maintain the plan.
203

===== PAGE 204 =====
The local authority should seek to re-engage the young person in education or
training as soon as possible.
9.204 A local authority will not be able to cease an EHC plan because a child or young
person has been given a custodial sentence. The local authority will have to keep the
plan while the child or young person is in custody. Details of the local authority’s
duties in those circumstances are set out in Chapter 10, Children and young people
in specific circumstances.
9.205 Where a local authority is considering ceasing to maintain a child or young person’s
EHC plan it must:
• inform the child’s parent or the young person that it is considering this
• consult the child’s parent or the young person
• consult the school or other institution that is named in the EHC plan
9.206 Where, following the consultation, the local authority decides to cease to maintain
the child or young person’s EHC plan, it must notify the child’s parent or the young
person, the institution named in the child or young person’s EHC plan and the
responsible CCG of that decision. The local authority must also notify the child’s
parent or the young person of their right to appeal that decision and the time limit for
doing so, of the requirement for them to consider mediation should they wish to
appeal, and the availability of information, advice and support, and disagreement
resolution services.
9.207 Support should generally cease at the end of the academic year, to allow young
people to complete their programme of study. In the case of a young person who
reaches their 25th birthday before their course has ended, the EHC plan can be
maintained until the end of the academic year in which they turn 25 (or the day the
apprenticeship or course ends, or the day before their 26th birthday if later). It is
important that a child or young person’s exit from an EHC plan is planned carefully,
to support smooth transitions and effective preparation for adulthood. See
paragraphs 8.77 to 8.80 of Chapter 8 on ‘Leaving education or training’ for more
information.
9.208 Where a young person aged 18 or over is in receipt of adult services, the local
authority should ensure that adult services are involved in and made aware of the
decision to cease the young person’s EHC plan.
9.209 Where the child’s parent or the young person disagrees with the local authority’s
decision to cease their EHC plan, they may appeal to the Tribunal. Local authorities
204

===== PAGE 205 =====
must continue to maintain the EHC plan until the time has passed for bringing an
appeal or, when an appeal has been registered, until it has been concluded.
9.210 Where the care part of an EHC plan is provided by adult services under the Care Act
2014 because the person is 18 or over, the Care Plan will remain in place when the
other elements of the EHC plan cease. There will be no requirement for the young
person to be re-assessed at this point, unless there is reason to re-assess him or her
for health and social care because their circumstances have changed.
Disclosure of an EHC plan
Relevant legislation: Regulations 17 and 47 of the SEND Regulations 2014
9.211 A child or young person’s EHC plan must be kept securely so that unauthorised
persons do not have access to it, so far as reasonably practicable (this includes any
representations, evidence, advice or information related to the EHC plan). An EHC
plan must not be disclosed without the consent of the child or the young person,
except for specified purposes or in the interests of the child or young person. If a
child does not have sufficient age or understanding to allow him or her to consent to
such disclosure, the child’s parent may give consent on the child’s behalf. The
specified purposes include:
• disclosure to the Tribunal when the child’s parent or the young person
appeals, and to the Secretary of State if a complaint is made to him or her
under the 1996 Act
• disclosure on the order of any court or for the purpose of any criminal
proceedings
• disclosure for the purposes of investigations of maladministration under the
Local Government Act 1974
• disclosure to enable any authority to perform duties arising from the
Disabled Persons (Services, Consultation and Representation) Act 1986, or
from the Children Act 1989 relating to safeguarding and promoting the
welfare of children
• disclosure to Ofsted inspection teams as part of their inspections of schools
or other educational institutions and local authorities
• disclosure to any person in connection with the young person’s application
for a Disabled Students Allowance in advance of taking up a place in higher
education, when requested to do so by the young person
205

===== PAGE 206 =====
• disclosure to the principal (or equivalent position) of the institution at which
the young person is intending to start higher education, when requested to
do so by the young person, and
• disclosure to persons engaged in research on SEN on the condition that
the researchers do not publish anything derived from, or contained in, the
plan which would identify any individual, particularly the child, young person
or child’s parent. Disclosure in the interests of research should be in
accordance with the Data Protection Act 1998 and wherever possible
should be with the knowledge and consent of the child and his or her parent
or the young person
9.212 The interests of the child or young person include the provision of information to the
child or young person’s educational institution. It is important that teachers or other
educational professionals working closely with the child or young person should have
full knowledge of the child or young person’s EHC plan. School governing bodies
should have access to a child or young person’s EHC plan. Disclosure in the
interests of the child or young person also includes disclosure to any agencies other
than the local authority which may be referred to in the plan as making educational,
health or social care provision.
9.213 Disclosure of the EHC plan, where the local authority considers this necessary in the
interests of the child or young person, can be in whole or in part. Local authorities
should consider carefully when disclosing an EHC plan whether there are parts of
the EHC plan that do not need to be disclosed in the interests of the child or young
person, for example sensitive health or social care information. All those who have
access to the EHC plan should always bear in mind the need to maintain
confidentiality about the child or young person in question.
Transport costs for children and young people with EHC
plans
Relevant legislation: Section 30 of the Children and Families Act 2014 and Schedule
2(14) of the SEND Regulations 2014
9.214 The parents’ or young person’s preferred school or college might be further away
from their home than the nearest school or college that can meet the child or young
person’s SEN. In such a case, the local authority can name the nearer school or
college if it considers it to be appropriate for meeting the child or young person’s
SEN. If the parents prefer the school or college that is further away, the local
authority may agree to this but is able to ask the parents to provide some or all of the
transport funding.
206

===== PAGE 207 =====
9.215 Transport should be recorded in the EHC plan only in exceptional cases where the
child has particular transport needs. Local authorities must have clear general
arrangements and policies relating to transport for children and young people with
SEN or disabilities that must be made available to parents and young people, and
these should be included in the Local Offer. Such policies must set out the transport
arrangements which are over and above those required by section 508B of the
Education Act 1996.
9.216 Where the local authority names a residential provision at some distance from the
family’s home, the local authority must provide reasonable transport or travel
assistance. The latter might be reimbursement of public transport costs, petrol costs
or provision of a travel pass.
9.217 Transport costs may be provided as part of a Personal Budget where one is agreed
and included in the EHC plan as part of the special educational provision.
207

===== PAGE 208 =====
10 Children and young people in specific
circumstances
What this chapter covers
This chapter highlights particular groups of children and young people whose
specific circumstances require additional consideration by those who work with them
and support their special educational needs (SEN). It sets out information about
managing their circumstances in order to achieve effective joined-up service
provision that can help achieve good outcomes for them.
These groups include:
• looked after children
• care leavers
• children and young people with SEN and social care needs, including
children in need
• children and young people educated out of area
• children and young people with SEN who are educated at home
• children and young people in alternative provision
• children and young people who have SEN and are in hospital
• children of service personnel
• children and young people in youth custody
Relevant legislation
Primary
The Children and Families Act 2014
The Chronically Sick and Disabled Persons Act 1970
The Children Act 1989
The Education Act 1996
The Crime and Disorder Act 1998
Section 20 of the Children and Young Persons Act 2008
208

===== PAGE 209 =====
The Apprenticeship, Skills and Learning Act 2009
The Equality Act 2010
The National Health Service Act 2006
Regulations
The Children Act 1989 – Guidance and Regulations Volume 3: Planning Transitions
to Adulthood for Care Leavers
Education (Pupil Information) Regulations 2005
The Designated Teacher (Looked after Pupils etc) Regulations 2009
The Special Educational Needs and Disability (Detained Persons) Regulations 2015
The National Health Service Commissioning Board and Clinical Commissioning
Groups (Responsibilities and Standing Rules) Regulations 2012
Looked-after children
10.1 Children who are being accommodated, or who have been taken into care, by a local
authority (i.e. under Section 20, or Sections 31 or 38 of the Children Act 1989) are
legally defined as being ‘looked after’ by the local authority. Around 70% of looked
after children have some form of SEN, and it is likely that a significant proportion of
them will have an Education, Health and Care (EHC) plan. Children and young
people on remand to youth detention accommodation are treated as looked after by
their designated local authority under the terms of the Legal Aid, Sentencing and
Punishment of Offenders Act 2012 (section 104(1)). Further information is provided
in paragraphs 10.142 to 10.145.
10.2 Local authorities will have particular responsibilities for these children and will act as
a ‘corporate parent’. The local authority must safeguard and promote the welfare of
all children they are looking after.
10.3 All maintained schools and academies and free schools must appoint a Designated
Teacher for looked after children. Where that role is carried out by a person other
than the SEN Co-ordinator (SENCO), Designated Teachers should work closely with
the SENCO to ensure that the implications of a child being both looked after and
having SEN are fully understood by relevant school staff.
10.4 Local authorities must promote the educational achievement of the children they
look after, regardless of where they are placed. The Children and Families Act 2014
requires every local authority to appoint an officer who is an employee of that or
another authority to discharge that duty. This officer, often known as a Virtual School
Head (VSH), will lead a virtual school team which tracks the progress of children
209

===== PAGE 210 =====
looked after by the authority as if they attended a single school. Special Educational
Needs and Disabilities departments should work closely with the VSH as well as
social workers to ensure that local authorities have effective and joined-up processes
for meeting the SEN of looked after children.
10.5 Local authorities are required to act under care planning statutory guidance issued
by the Secretary of State when exercising their social services functions with regard
to the children they look after. This is set out in volume 2 of the Children Act 1989
guidance.
10.6 This means that a considerable amount of planning will be done around the care,
health and education needs of looked after children. They will have a Care Plan,
which sets out how the local authority will meet the care needs of the child,
addressing all important dimensions of a child’s developmental needs. These include
health, education, emotional and behavioural development, identity, family and social
relationships, social presentation and self-care skills. The Care Plan will specifically
include a Personal Education Plan (PEP) and a Health Plan (both are a statutory
requirement) which will particularly assess and set out the child’s education and
health needs. It may be through making these assessments that a child’s SEN will
be identified.
10.7 Where a looked after child is being assessed for SEN it is vital to take account of
information set out in the Care Plan. SEN professionals must work closely with other
relevant professionals involved in the child’s life as a consequence of his/her being
looked after. These include the social worker, Designated Doctor or Nurse,
Independent Reviewing Officer (IRO), VSH and Designated Teacher in school. This
will ensure that the child’s EHC plan works in harmony with his/her Care Plan and
adds to, but does not duplicate, information about how education, health and care
needs will be met. It is essential to involve the child, their carers and, where
appropriate, their parents in the planning process. When referencing information
contained within the Care Plan only information relevant to meeting the child’s SEN
should be included in the EHC plan. If in any doubt SEN professionals should
discuss this with the social worker and, where appropriate, the child and their carers.
10.8 A significant proportion of looked after children live with foster carers or in a
children’s home and attend schools in a different local authority area to the local
authority that looks after them. Local authorities who place looked after children in
another authority need to be aware of that authority’s Local Offer if the children have
SEN. Where an assessment for an EHC plan has been triggered, the authority that
carries out the assessment is determined by Section 24 of the Children and Families
Act 2014. This means that the assessment must be carried out by the authority
where the child lives (i.e. is ordinarily resident), which may not be the same as the
authority that looks after the child. If a disagreement arises, the authority that looks
210

===== PAGE 211 =====
after the child, will act as the ‘corporate parent’ in any disagreement resolution, as
described in Chapter 11.
10.9 It is the looked after child’s social worker (in close consultation with the VSH in the
authority that looks after the child) that will ultimately make any educational decision
on the child’s behalf. However, the day-to-day responsibility for taking these
decisions should be delegated to the carer who will advocate for the looked after
child and make appeals to the First-tier Tribunal (SEN and Disability) as necessary.
10.10 For a child in a stable, long-term foster placement it may well be appropriate for the
carer to take on the responsibility of managing a Personal Budget but this will need
careful case-by-case consideration. (See Chapter 9).
10.11 The Care Planning Regulations specify the frequency with which Care Plans are
reviewed. It is important to ensure the annual review of an EHC plan coincides with
one of the child’s Care Plan reviews. This could be done as part of the review of a
child’s PEP which feeds into the review of the wider Care Plan. Social workers and
SEN teams will need to work closely together to ensure that transitions from being
looked after to returning home are managed effectively, to ensure continuing
provision.
Care leavers
10.12 Some children will cease to be looked after at 16 or 17 and others will continue to be
looked after until their 18th birthday. (Some care leavers will remain living with their
former foster carers past their 18th birthday in ‘Staying Put’ arrangements, but they
are no longer looked after). Local authorities continue to have responsibilities to
provide a Personal Adviser and to prepare a Pathway Plan. The Personal Adviser is
there to ensure that care leavers are provided with the right kind of personal support,
for example by signposting them to services and providing advice. The Pathway Plan
plots transition from care to adulthood for care leavers up to the age of 25 if they
remain in education and/or training or are not in employment, education or training
and plan to return to education and/or training. In reviewing their arrangements for
EHC needs assessment and EHC plan development local authorities should ensure
good advanced planning involving the young person and Personal Adviser.
SEN and social care needs, including children in need
Children’s social care
10.13 There is a statutory duty, under Section 17 of the Children Act 1989, for local
authorities to safeguard and promote the welfare of ‘children in need’ in their area,
including disabled children, by providing appropriate services to them. Services for
disabled children provided under Section 17 will typically include short breaks for
parent carers, equipment or adaptations to the home, and support for parents from
211

===== PAGE 212 =====
social workers, for example in support of parenting capacity. If a local authority
determines that a disabled child needs support under Section 17, it must consider
whether such support is of the type outlined in Section 2 of the Chronically Sick and
Disabled Persons Act (CSDPA) 1970. Where it is, the local authority must provide
that support. Where an EHC plan is being prepared for a disabled child or young
person under the age of 18, any services to be provided under Section 2 of the
CSDPA must be included in section H1 of the EHC plan. All other social care
services, including services provided under Section 17 of the Children Act but not
under Section 2 of the CSDPA must be included in Section H2 of the EHC plan.
Chapter 9 gives further details on what to include in Sections H1 and H2 of the EHC
plan, in the table after paragraph 9.69.
10.14 Following acceptance of a referral by the local authority children’s social care
service, a social worker should lead a multi-agency assessment under section 17 of
the Children Act 1989. Local authorities have a duty to ascertain the child’s wishes
and feelings and take account of them when planning the provision of services.
10.15 The purposes of social care assessments are:
• to gather important information about a child and family
• to analyse their needs and/or the nature and level of any risk or harm being
suffered by a child
• to decide whether the child is a child in need (Section 17 of the Children Act
1989) and/or is suffering significant harm (Section 47 of the Children Act
1989), and
• to provide support to address those needs to improve the child’s outcomes
10.16 A good social care assessment supports professionals to understand whether a child
has needs relating to their care or a disability and/or is suffering or likely to suffer
significant harm. Working Together to Safeguard Children 2013 sets out the process
for managing individual cases which are referred to and accepted by children’s social
care. All assessments should be child centred, focused on outcomes, transparent,
timely and proportionate to the needs of each child. The maximum timeframe for a
social care assessment to conclude that a decision can be taken on next steps is 45
working days from the point of referral.
10.17 Local authorities with their partners should develop and publish local protocols for
assessment which should set out how the needs of disabled children will be
addressed in the assessment process and clarify how statutory social care
assessments will be informed by and inform other specialist assessments including
EHC needs assessments leading to an EHC plan.
212

===== PAGE 213 =====
10.18 Where there is an EHC needs assessment, it should be an holistic assessment of
the child or young person’s education, health and social care needs. EHC needs
assessments should be combined with social care assessments under Section 17 of
the Children Act 1989 where appropriate. This is explicit in Working Together to
Safeguard Children 2013, which can be found on the GOV.UK website – a link is
given in the References section under Introduction, and a webtext version is also
available.
10.19 For all children who have social care plans the social worker should co-ordinate any
outward facing plan with other professionals. Where there are specific child
protection concerns resulting in action under Section 47 of the Children Act, careful
consideration should be given to how closely the assessment processes across
education, health and care can be integrated, in order to ensure that the needs of
vulnerable children are put first.
10.20 EHC plan reviews should be synchronised with social care plan reviews, and must
always meet the needs of the individual child.
Power to continue children’s social care services to those aged 18
to 25
10.21 Where a local authority has been providing children’s social care services to a young
person under the age of 18, and they have an EHC plan in place, local authorities
can continue to provide these services on the same basis after the age of 18.
10.22 The local authority retains discretion over how long it chooses to provide these
services, so long as an EHC plan remains in place. Where the young person no
longer has an EHC plan, the local authority no longer has the power to extend the
provision of these services to young people over 18.
10.23 This will enable local authorities to agree with young people when the most
appropriate time for transition to adult services will be, avoiding key pressure points
such as exams or a move from school to college. Poorly timed and planned
transition to adult services will have a detrimental effect on achievement of outcomes
and may result in young people requiring far longer to complete their education or
leaving education altogether. This can have a negative impact on their health and
care needs and it is essential that the transition between children’s and adult’s
services is managed and planned carefully.
10.24 As part of transition planning, the needs of carers should also be assessed or
reviewed to explore the impact of changing circumstances on the carer. More
guidance on planning the transition from children’s to adult services can be found in
Chapter 8, Preparing for adulthood from the earliest years.
213

===== PAGE 214 =====
10.25 Information on adult social care can be found in Chapters 8 and 9. Further
information about preparing for transition can be found in the Preparing for
Adulthood factsheet ‘The Links Between the Children and Families Act 2014 and the
Care Act’. A web link for this is given in the References section under Chapter 10.
Children and young people educated out of area
10.26 Where a child or young person being educated out of the local authority’s area is
brought to the local authority’s attention as potentially having SEN, the home local
authority (where the child normally lives) should decide whether to assess the child
or young person and decide whether an EHC plan is required.
10.27 Where a child or young person being educated out of area has an EHC plan, the
home local authority must ensure that the special educational provision set out in
the plan is being made. They must review the EHC plan annually. Local authorities
can make reciprocal arrangements to carry out these duties on each other’s behalf.
10.28 If the child or young person is placed by a local authority at an independent special
school, non-maintained special school or independent specialist provider, the local
authority must pay the appropriate costs.
10.29 If it is a residential placement, so far as reasonably practicable, those placing the
child or young person should try to secure a placement that is near to the child’s
home. However, in making this decision they must have regard for the views, wishes
and feelings of the child or young person and their families about the placement.
Where the local authority names a residential provision at some distance from the
family’s home the local authority must provide reasonable transport or travel
assistance. The latter might be reimbursement of public transport costs, petrol costs
or provision of a travel pass.
Children and young people with SEN educated at home
10.30 Under Section 7 of the Education Act 1996 parents have the right to educate
children, including children with SEN, at home. Home education must be suitable to
the child’s age, ability, aptitude and SEN. Local authorities should work in
partnership with, and support, parents to ensure that the SEN of these children are
met where the local authority already knows the children have SEN or the parents
have drawn the children’s special needs to the authority’s attention. Local authorities
do not have a duty under section 22 of the Children and Families Act 2014 to assess
every home educated child to see whether or not they have SEN. The high needs
block of the Dedicated Schools Grant is intended to fund provision for all relevant
children and young people in the authority’s area, including home-educated children.
Local authorities should fund the SEN needs of home-educated children where it is
appropriate to do so. Guidance is available to local authorities from the Department
214

===== PAGE 215 =====
for Education on funding provision for home-educated children.
10.31 In cases where local authorities and parents agree that home education is the right
provision for a child or young person with an EHC plan, the plan should make clear
that the child or young person will be educated at home. If it does then the local
authority, under Section 42(2) of the Children and Families Act 2014, must arrange
the special educational provision set out in the plan, working with the parents. Under
Section 19 of the Act, a local authority must have regard to the views, wishes and
feelings of the child and his or her parents, or the young person.
10.32 In cases where the EHC plan gives the name of a school or type of school where the
child will be educated and the parents decide to educate at home, the local authority
is not under a duty to make the special educational provision set out in the plan
provided it is satisfied that the arrangements made by the parents are suitable. The
local authority must review the plan annually to assure itself that the provision set
out in it continues to be appropriate and that the child’s SEN continue to be met (see
Chapter 9). Where the local authority has decided that the provision is appropriate, it
should amend the plan to name the type of school that would be suitable but state
that parents have made their own arrangements under Section 7 of the Education
Act 1996.
10.33 Where a child or young person is a registered pupil and the parent decides to home
educate, the parent must notify the school in writing that the child or young person is
receiving education otherwise than at school and the school must then remove the
pupil's name from the admission register. If the school is a special school, the local
authority must give consent for the child's name to be removed, but this should not
be a lengthy or complex process. There is no provision in law for a ‘trial period’ of
home education.
10.34 Local authorities do not have the right of entry to the family home to check that the
provision being made by the parents is appropriate and may only enter the home at
the invitation of the parents. Parents should be encouraged to see this process as
part of the authority’s overall approach to home education of pupils with SEN,
including the provision of appropriate support, rather than an attempt to undermine
the parents’ right to home educate.
10.35 Local authorities should not assume that because the provision being made by
parents is different from that which was being made or would have been made in
school that the provision is necessarily unsuitable. Local authorities should also
consider using their power to help parents make suitable provision.
10.36 In some cases a local authority will conclude that, even after considering its power to
provide support to home-educating parents, the provision that is or could be made
215

===== PAGE 216 =====
for a child or young person with an EHC plan does not meet the child or young
person’s needs. The local authority is required to intervene through the school
attendance order framework ‘if it appears…that a child of compulsory school age is
not receiving suitable education’. The serving of a school attendance order is a last
resort if all attempts to improve provision are unsuccessful. ‘Suitable education’
means efficient full-time education suitable to the child or young person’s age, ability
and aptitude and to any SEN he or she may have.
10.37 Parents may also home educate children who have SEN but do not have EHC plans.
As with children and young people with EHC plans, local authorities should work with
parents and consider whether to provide support in the home to help the parents
make suitable provision. Information about the right to request an EHC needs
assessment and the right to appeal should be available to all parents including those
who are considering home education because they feel that the special educational
support being provided in the school is insufficient to meet the child or young
person's needs.
10.38 Young people may also be educated at home in order to meet the requirement to
participate in education and training until the age of 18. Local authorities should
involve parents, as appropriate, in the reviews of EHC plans of home-educated
young people who are over compulsory school age.
Children with SEN who are in alternative provision
10.39 Local authorities must make arrangements where, for any reason, a child of
compulsory school age would not otherwise receive suitable education. Suitable
education means efficient education suitable to a child or young person’s age, ability
and aptitude and to any SEN he or she may have. This education must be full time,
unless the local authority determines that, for reasons relating to the physical or
mental health of the child, a reduced level of education would be in the child’s best
interests.
10.40 Where this education is arranged elsewhere than at a school it is commonly referred
to as alternative provision. Alternative provision includes pupil referral units,
alternative provision academies and alternative provision free schools. Local
authorities must have regard to statutory guidance on alternative provision and on
the education of children unable to attend school because of health needs. This
guidance specifies that the education provided should be on a par with mainstream
schools. The guidance is available on the GOV.UK website – see the References
section under Chapter 10 for a link.
10.41 Local authorities, schools and post-16 education providers may commission
alternative provision for other children and young people who face barriers to
participation in mainstream education or training.
216

===== PAGE 217 =====
10.42 Alternative provision must be arranged in line with a child or young person’s EHC
plan. Local authorities may need to amend a plan where, for example, a child or
young person is no longer attending the institution named on it. They should also
consider whether the EHC plan needs to be reviewed to ensure that the child or
young person’s SEN will be appropriately supported. Where alternative provision is
specified in a child or young person’s EHC plan the local authority must arrange that
provision.
10.43 Where a child or young person in alternative provision has SEN that are not
specified in an EHC plan then the alternative provider should employ a graduated
response to these needs, as set out in Chapter 6.
10.44 The support that will be provided for children and young people with SEN, with or
without an EHC plan, should be agreed as part of the commissioning process. To
allow for continuity of support, mainstream and alternative providers should promptly
share appropriate information on a child or young person’s SEN. Commissioners of
alternative provision should ensure that there is a clear plan for pupils’ progression
and keep the arrangements under regular review so that they can be adapted in
response to the needs of the child or young person. Where an alternative provider
has concerns that a child or young person may have SEN that are not being
appropriately supported then they should raise their concerns with the commissioner
and agree how these potential needs will be assessed and supported.
10.45 Alternative provision includes providers of online learning. Whilst it will not be
appropriate in every case, online learning can offer certain benefits where there are
significant barriers to a child or young person physically attending an educational
institution. For example, online learning can provide for real-time teaching support,
allow access to a broader curriculum and offer opportunities for students to interact
with each other. Decisions on whether to arrange online learning are for the local
authority or institution commissioning the provision to make, although they should
take into account the views of professionals, parents or carers and the child or young
person.
10.46 In making this decision, commissioners should give particular consideration to the
support that will be provided for children or young people’s SEN, as well as their
social, emotional and physical development. Where feasible, online learning should
be accompanied by opportunities for face-to-face contact with peers. Any decision to
use online learning from a child or young person’s own home should include an
assessment of his or her suitability for independent learning and home
circumstances.
217

===== PAGE 218 =====
Children and young people in alternative provision because of
health needs
10.47 In line with local authorities’ duty to arrange suitable education as set out above,
children and young people who are in hospital or placed in other forms of alternative
provision because of their health needs should have access to education that is on a
par with that of mainstream provision, including appropriate support to meet the
needs of those with SEN. The education they receive should be good quality and
prevent them from slipping behind their peers. It should involve suitably qualified
staff who can help pupils progress and enable them to successfully reintegrate back
into school as soon as possible. This includes children and young people admitted to
hospital under Section 2 of the Mental Health Act 2007.
10.48 Young people with health needs who are over the school leaving age should also be
encouraged to continue learning. Under Raising the Participation Age legislation,
local authorities have duties to promote effective participation in education or training
for 16- and 17-year-olds. Useful information on Raising the Participation Age can be
found on the GOV.UK website – a link is given in the References section under
Chapter 10.
10.49 When a child or young person with an EHC plan is admitted to hospital, the local
authority that maintains the plan should be informed so that they can ensure the
provision set out in the plan continues to be provided. If necessary, the EHC plan
may be reviewed and amended to ensure it remains appropriate and the child’s SEN
continue to be met.
10.50 Where children or young people with health needs are returning to mainstream
education then the local authority should work with them, their family, the current
education provider and the new school or post-16 provider to produce a reintegration
plan. This will help ensure that their educational, health and social care needs
continue to be met. Where relevant, a reintegration plan should be linked to a child
or young person’s EHC plan or individual healthcare plan.
10.51 It is important that medical commissioners and local authorities work together to
minimise the disruption to children and young people’s education. In order for local
authorities to meet their duties, medical commissioners should notify them as soon
as possible about any need to arrange education, ideally in advance of the hospital
placement. For example, where a child of compulsory school age is normally
resident in a local authority but is receiving medical treatment elsewhere, it is still the
duty of the ‘home’ local authority to arrange suitable education if it would not
otherwise be received.
10.52 In certain circumstances, local authorities’ duties may require them to commission
independent educational provision. Such providers would need to be funded directly
218

===== PAGE 219 =====
by the home local authority. Local authorities’ duties do not specifically require them
to commission a particular educational provider. Medical commissioners should,
therefore, avoid making commitments to fund education without the local authority’s
agreement. Decisions about educational provision should not, however,
unnecessarily disrupt a child or young person’s education or treatment.
Children of Service personnel
10.53 The Children’s Education Advisory Service (CEAS) within the Ministry of Defence
provides advice and guidance to Service parents, educational establishments and
local authorities on educational issues relating to Service children, including issues
relating to SEN. Service Children’s Education (SCE) provides mainstream education
for Service children in some overseas locations. As the education, health and social
care resources available overseas are different from the UK, MoD services complete
an MoD Assessment of Supportability Overseas (MASO) for all Service children with
complex needs before an overseas posting is agreed. Personal Budgets agreed in
the UK cannot be transferred to SCE locations overseas.
10.54 Children whose parent(s) are Service personnel may face difficulties that are unique
to the nature of their serving parent’s employment. These needs may arise from:
• service induced mobility: Service personnel may relocate more often
than the rest of the population and, sometimes, at short notice. Such
transitions should be well managed to avoid Service children with SEN
experiencing delays in having their needs assessed and met
• the deployment of serving parents to operational arenas, while not
constituting SEN in itself, may result in a Service child experiencing anxiety,
dips in educational performance and/or emotional difficulties. Children may
also be affected similarly by siblings’ deployment
Action to take in respect of Service children with SEN
10.55 In having regard to this Code of Practice and in meeting the aspirations of the Armed
Forces Covenant, which attempts to eliminate or mitigate some of the potential
disadvantages faced by Service families, all those with statutory responsibilities
towards Service children with SEN should ensure that the impact of their policies,
administrative processes and patterns of provision do not disadvantage such
children because of their Service-related lifestyle.
10.56 In respect of Service children, schools and other education providers should:
• ensure that mechanisms are in place to enable effective and timely receipt
and dispatch of all relevant records for Service children with SEN moving
between schools in the UK and overseas, to enable effective planning,
219

===== PAGE 220 =====
ideally in advance of the child’s arrival in school. Maintained schools must
transfer information, including SEN information, about pupils to other
schools in the UK (maintained or independent) in accordance with the
Education (Pupil Information) Regulations 2005. To support the transfer of
information on Service children with SEN the MoD has developed the Pupil
Information Profile for Service children, which includes details of a child’s
SEN. It is available for use by schools across the UK and overseas and is
available from the Children’s Education Advisory Service (CEAS) on the
GOV.UK website (see the References section under Chapter 10 for a link)
• ensure that all reviews for Service children with SEN explicitly consider
those Service-related issues (for example, Service-induced mobility)
relevant to the outcomes of those reviews
• ensure that access to appropriate assessments, interventions and provision
is determined solely on the nature, severity and complexity of the needs
presented by Service children with SEN and not related to the amount of
time they have left in a particular school
• consider how any funds received through the Service Pupils’ Premium
might be used to improve their overall approaches to meeting the SEN of
Service children
10.57 Local authorities should:
• when commissioning services for children and young people with SEN,
take account, with their partners (for example, Health and Social Care), of
the particular needs of any Service communities within their boundaries for
a Service child with SEN, consider the likely impact on the child’s needs
and the provision made to meet them of any relevant Service-related issue.
When carrying out an assessment of a Service child’s needs or making an
EHC plan, local authorities must seek advice from CEAS, acting on behalf
of the Secretary of State for Defence
• when children move home across local authority boundaries, transfer the
EHC plan from the ‘old’ local authority to the ‘new’ local authority within 15
days from when they first become aware of the move. The new local
authority will have to tell the parents within 6 weeks of the transfer of the
EHC plan whether the authority will bring forward the annual review of the
plan and whether it intends to reassess the child. From the transfer of the
plan the new local authority must arrange the special educational provision
set out in it, although a child may have to be placed in a school other than
the one named on the plan if the distance of the move makes it impractical
220

===== PAGE 221 =====
to send the child to the named school
• work with each other, particularly those which have bases within their
areas, and CEAS, so that special educational provision can be made as
soon as a child arrives in the new authority. Anticipated moves should not
be used to delay the provision of appropriate support for children or the
carrying out of needs assessments
• when considering provision for Service children with SEN or disabilities,
use all relevant evidence, including statements made for Service children in
Wales and Northern Ireland, as well as Co-ordinated Support Plans made
for them in Scotland and the Service Children’s Assessment of Need
(SCAN) completed for them by SCE
• when Personal Budgets are agreed with mobile Service parents, work with
sending/receiving local authorities and the parents concerned to ensure
that adequate, appropriate and timely arrangements are made in the
receiving authority to ensure continuity of those elements of the overall
provision purchased for Service children with SEN by the Personal Budgets
allocated
First-tier Tribunal (SEN and Disability)
10.58 In reaching decisions about appeals from Service parents, the First-tier Tribunal
(SEN and Disability) should consider, on the basis of the evidence available to them,
the extent to which Service-induced mobility has had, is having and will have an
impact on the appropriateness and effectiveness of the provision offered by local
authorities and that requested by the parents.
Further information
10.59 Further information and advice about the education of Service children with SEN, in
England or elsewhere in the world, including the public funds available for boarding
placements and the services available in SCE schools overseas, is available from
the Children’s Education Advisory Service (CEAS) information page on the GOV.UK
website – see the References section under Chapter 10 for a link.
221

===== PAGE 222 =====
Children and young people with SEN who are in youth
custody
Relevant legislation
Primary
Sections 70-75 of the Children and Families Act 2014, together with sections 28, 31,
and 77
The National Health Service Act 2006
The Equality Act 2010
Section 2 of the Chronically Sick and Disabled Persons Act 1970
Section 17 of the Children Act 1989
Section 39A of the Crime and Disorder Act 1998
Section 562B of the Education Act 1996
Regulations
The Special Educational Needs and Disability (Detained Persons) Regulations 2015
The Special Education Needs and Disability Regulations 2014
The National Health Service Commissioning Board and Clinical Commissioning
Groups (Responsibilities and Standing Rules) Regulations 2012 (Part 3 and
Schedule 3)
What this section covers
10.60 This section outlines roles and responsibilities in relation to children and young
people aged 18 and under who have been remanded or sentenced by the Courts to
relevant youth accommodation in England. Relevant Youth Accommodation refers to
a Young Offender Institution, Secure Training Centre, Secure Children’s Home or
Secure College. The term ‘detained person’ is used throughout to describe these
children and young people and includes those who are voluntarily detained in a
Secure Children’s Home. The term ‘appropriate person’ is used throughout this
section to describe either the detained person’s parent, where the detained person is
a child, or the young person, where the detained person is a young person. ‘Parent’
includes any person who is not a parent of the child but has parental responsibility or
who cares for him or her (see Glossary).
222

===== PAGE 223 =====
10.61 This section does not apply to children and young people serving their sentence in
the community, to persons detained in a Young Offenders Institution for 18- to 21-
year-olds or to persons detained in the adult estate.
10.62 Unless otherwise stated a reference to ‘a local authority’ means the home local
authority. For a detained person with an EHC plan this is the local authority which
maintained their EHC plan when they were in the community. In custody a request
for an assessment of post-detention EHC needs must be made to the home local
authority, meaning where the detained person is ‘ordinarily resident’.
10.63 ‘The person in charge of the relevant youth accommodation’ includes the Governor,
Director or Principal in charge of the accommodation.
Introduction
10.64 Local authorities, Youth Offending Teams (YOTs), health commissioners and those
in charge of the relevant youth accommodation must have regard to this Code of
Practice and this section should be read alongside the guidance in other chapters.
10.65 The principles underpinning the Code (see Chapter 1) are relevant when supporting
detained persons to achieve the best possible educational and other outcomes and
to prepare for adulthood and independent living. They support:
• the participation of the detained person and the child’s parents in
decisions relating to their individual support. Local authorities must
have regard to their views, wishes and feelings and must provide them
with information, advice and support to enable them to participate
• the timely identification and assessment of special educational needs
and provision of high quality support at the earliest opportunity whether
they have an EHC plan or not
• greater collaboration between education, health and social care with a
focus on continuity of provision both when a detained person enters
custody and after their release. Custodial sentences are often short, it
is therefore important for decisions to be made as soon as possible to
ensure appropriate provision is put in place without delay
Summary of statutory requirements
10.66 The statutory requirements relating to children and young people detained in youth
custody are:
• Local authorities must not cease an EHC plan when a child or young person
enters custody. They must keep it while the detained person is detained and
223

===== PAGE 224 =====
they must maintain and review it when the detained person is released (see
paragraphs 10.121 to 10.122 and paragraph 10.136)
• If a detained person has an EHC plan before being detained (or one is
completed while the detained person is in the relevant youth accommodation)
the local authority must arrange appropriate special educational provision for
the detained person while he or she is detained (see paragraphs 10.123 to
10.127)
• If the EHC plan for a detained person specifies health care provision, the
health services commissioner for the relevant youth accommodation must
arrange appropriate health care provision for the detained person (see
paragraph 10.128 to 10.131). (The NHS Commissioning Board and Clinical
Commissioning Groups (Responsibilities and Standing Rules) Regulations
confer responsibility on the NHS Commissioning Board (NHS England) for
commissioning health services in prisons and custodial establishments.)
10.67 For a detained person with an EHC plan, appropriate special educational and health
care provision is the provision specified in the plan. If it is not practicable to arrange
the provision specified in the EHC plan, special educational and health provision
corresponding as closely as possible to that in the EHC plan must be arranged. If it
appears to the local authority that the special educational provision in the EHC plan
is no longer appropriate, the local authority must arrange provision it considers
appropriate. Likewise, if it appears to the health care commissioner for the relevant
youth accommodation that the health care provision in the EHC plan is no longer
appropriate, that commissioner must arrange health care provision that appears
appropriate to it. Local authorities should also consider whether any social care
needs identified in the EHC plan will remain while the detained person is in custody
and provide appropriate provision if necessary. For example, if a detained child is
looked after, the existing relationship with their social worker should continue and the
detained child should continue to access specific services and support where
needed.
10.68 Where a detained person does not have an EHC plan, the appropriate person or the
person in charge of the relevant youth accommodation can request an assessment
of the detained person’s post-detention EHC needs from the local authority. The
appropriate person can appeal to the First-tier Tribunal (SEN and Disability) if they
disagree with the decisions of the local authority about certain matters.
10.69 Anyone else, including YOTs and the education provider in custody, has a right to
bring the detained person to the notice of the local authority as someone who may
have special educational needs and the local authority must consider whether an
assessment of their post-detention EHC needs is necessary.
224

===== PAGE 225 =====
10.70 YOTs and those in charge of the relevant youth accommodation must co-operate
with the local authority to ensure that these duties can be fulfilled and must have
regard to this Code of Practice.
Sharing information
10.71 All detained persons entering the youth justice system are assessed by the YOT
using the approved Youth Justice Board (YJB) assessment tool. As part of the
assessment process, YOTs will seek information from a number of sources,
including local authorities, education institutions and health providers. The local
authority, education institution and health provider should respond to this request as
soon as possible.
10.72 The YOT must notify the local authority when a child or young person aged 18 and
under is detained. If the detained person has an EHC plan the local authority must
send it to the YOT, the person in charge of the relevant youth accommodation and
the detained person’s health commissioner within five working days of becoming
aware of the detention. Information from the EHC plan will feed into the YOT
assessment. The information sharing protocols described in the section in Chapter 9
(9.32 to 9.34), on ‘Sharing information’ and the protocols on disclosure of EHC plans
(9.211 to 9.213) apply in the same way to EHC plans which are kept for detained
persons (under Regulation 17 of the Special Educational Needs and Disability
(Detained Persons) Regulations 2012).
10.73 If a detained person has SEN and this is known to the local authority, the local
authority should provide all available information to the YOT, including details of any
assessments the detained person has had and any needs which have been
identified. The YOT will then share this information with the detained person’s
custodial case manager (using the established information sharing process via the
YJB's placements team) to inform the work of key personnel (such as the health
provider or SENCO for the relevant youth accommodation) who will be involved in
delivering the detained person’s sentence plan. Information about a detained
person's educational history, including any SEN, should be reflected in the pre-
sentence report if deemed relevant to the court case. The court may ask for sight of
the detained person’s EHC plan.
Education for children and young people in youth custody
10.74 The local authority must promote the fulfilment of the detained person’s learning
potential while they are in custody and on their release, whether they have an EHC
plan or not.
10.75 The detained person’s YOT will remain the key point of contact between the person
in charge of the relevant youth accommodation and the local authority, although the
225

===== PAGE 226 =====
local authority may also need to discuss the provision directly with the person in
charge of the relevant youth accommodation (as well as the education provider).
10.76 Each detained person entering custody will undergo an educational assessment,
including an assessment of literacy, numeracy and, where necessary, a screening to
identify whether further assessments to identify SEN are required. This assessment
also relies on information from the local authority provided by the YOT and will
include any current EHC plan for the detained person (which the local authority must
send to both the YOT and to the person in charge of the relevant youth
accommodation). The results of assessments should enable the education provider
to develop an individual learning plan for the delivery of education for each detained
person.
10.77 Special educational provision should be put in place as soon as possible. Providers
in relevant youth accommodation should:
• meet the educational needs of all detained persons, including those
with SEN, whether they have an EHC plan or not
• ensure SEN provision, identification and support of SEN follows the
model (for schools and colleges) set out in Chapters 6 and 7 of this
Code
• have staff who are suitably qualified to support this (such as SENCOs),
and make referrals to other specialist support where this is appropriate
• liaise and co-operate with the local authority where a detained person
has an EHC plan
Healthcare for children and young people in youth custody
10.78 NHS England is the commissioner of healthcare services in prisons and custodial
establishments (with the exception of some emergency care, ambulance, out of
hours and 111 services) and manages contracts with healthcare providers to ensure
the delivery of agreed services for detained persons.
10.79 Standards for the healthcare of detained persons in secure settings are available
from the website of the Royal College of Paediatrics and Child Health (see the
References section under Chapter 10 for a link). These standards include guidance
on entry and assessment, care planning, physical and mental health, transfer and
continuity of care and multi-agency working. The relevant NHS England
provider/secure establishment is expected to consider these standards when
organising health care for those under 18 years old in secure settings.
226

===== PAGE 227 =====
10.80 All children and young people entering custody will be screened and assessed using
the Comprehensive Health Assessment Tool (CHAT) which includes a screening for
speech, language and communication needs. If a detained person has an EHC plan
when they enter custody, the information in the plan as well as information from the
local authority provided by the YOT, should inform or supplement this assessment.
This should lead to an individual health care plan for each detained person.
Requesting an EHC needs assessment for a detained person
10.81 Appropriate support after release will help the resettlement process. Therefore, if the
detained person has SEN, the appropriate person, or the person in charge of the
relevant youth accommodation, has a right to ask the local authority to arrange an
assessment of the detained person’s post-detention education, health and care
needs.
10.82 In addition, anyone can bring a detained person to the attention of their local
authority if they are concerned that the detained person has or may have SEN and
the local authority must determine whether an assessment of their post-detention
needs is necessary. This could include, for example, carers, health and social care
professionals, YOTs and those responsible for education in custody. YOTs, for
example, should consider bringing a detained person to the attention of the local
authority if the approved YJB assessment tool raises concerns about a detained
person who may have SEN. This should be done with the knowledge and, where
possible, the agreement of the appropriate person.
10.83 The purpose of assessing a detained person’s post-detention education, health and
care needs is to consider whether they may need support from an EHC plan on their
release from custody. EHC needs assessments can take up to 20 weeks to
complete, so enabling the assessment to begin in custody will help ensure that
appropriate support is in place as soon as possible after the detained person has
been released, in addition to ensuring support is in place in custody if the EHC plan
is finalised while they are detained.
Considering whether an assessment of post-detention education,
health and care needs is necessary
10.84 Following a request for an assessment of post-detention education, health and care
needs, or if the detained person has been brought to its attention, the local authority
must determine whether an assessment is necessary. When considering a request
the local authority must consult the appropriate person and the person in charge of
the relevant youth accommodation.
10.85 Where a local authority considers that the detained person may have SEN and is
considering whether an assessment of their post-detention EHC needs is necessary,
227

===== PAGE 228 =====
it must notify:
• the appropriate person (and must inform them of their right to express
written or oral views and submit evidence to the local authority)
• the person in charge of the relevant youth accommodation (informing them
of their right to express written or oral views and submit evidence to the
local authority, including evidence from the education provider)
• the home Clinical Commissioning Group (CCG) (with responsibility for
commissioning the detained person’s health services before he or she
entered the relevant youth accommodation)
• NHS England (since it has commissioning responsibility for health services
for detained persons while they are in the relevant youth accommodation)
• local authority officers responsible for social care for children or young
people with SEN
• where a detained person is registered at a school, the headteacher (or
equivalent)
• where the detained young person is registered at a post-16 institution, the
principal (or equivalent)
• where a detained person is registered at a Pupil Referral Unit, the principal
(or equivalent)
• the YOT responsible for the detained person
10.86 The local authority must secure an assessment of post-detention needs if the
detained person has or may have SEN and it may be necessary for special
educational provision to be made in accordance with an EHC plan on their release
from detention.
10.87 To inform their decision the local authority will need to take into account a wide
range of evidence, and should pay particular attention to:
• evidence of the detained person’s academic attainment, rate of progress
and engagement with education (such as exclusions and absence)
• information about the nature, extent and context of the detained person’s
SEN
• evidence of the action already being taken by the school or post-16
institution the detained person was attending prior to detention to meet their
SEN
228

===== PAGE 229 =====
• evidence that where progress has been made, it has only been as the
result of much additional intervention and support over and above that
which is usually provided, and
• evidence of the detained person’s physical, emotional and social
development and health needs, drawing on relevant evidence from
clinicians and other health professionals and what has been done to meet
these by other agencies including healthcare professionals in the relevant
youth accommodation
10.88 Local authorities may develop criteria to guide them in deciding whether it is
necessary to carry out an assessment of post-detention EHC needs and following
this whether to issue an EHC plan. However, local authorities must not apply a
‘blanket’ policy, for example, refusing to assess where a detained person has a
relatively long sentence or where they have not been engaged in education for a
number of years. The local authority must consider cases individually and be
prepared to depart from any local criteria where it is appropriate.
Advice and information for an assessment of post-detention
education, health and care needs
10.89 As with EHC needs assessments for children and young people in the community,
an assessment of post-detention education, health and care needs should be based
on a co-ordinated assessment and planning process which puts the detained person,
and the child’s parent, at the centre. Unless otherwise stated the principles and
timescales for assessing detained persons mirror those in the community, as
detailed in Chapter 9.
10.90 When securing a detained person’s needs assessment the local authority must
consult the detained person, and where they are a child, the child’s parent. The local
authority must take into account their views, wishes and feelings and must ensure
that they are fully able to participate in the decision making process.
10.91 Advice and information must be sought as follows:
• Educational advice and information from:
The head teacher or principal of the school or post-16 or other
o
institution which the detained person attended prior to detention
Where this is not available the authority must seek advice from
o
a person with experience of teaching children or young people
with SEN, or knowledge of the provision which may meet the
detained person’s needs
229

===== PAGE 230 =====
Where advice from a person with relevant teaching experience
o
or knowledge is not available and the detained person did not
attend an educational institution prior to entering detention, the
local authority must seek educational advice and information
from a person who was responsible for educational provision for
the detained person prior to detention
If the detained person is either vision or hearing impaired, or
o
both, the educational advice and information must be given
after consultation with a person who is qualified to teach pupils
or students with these impairments
• Medical advice and information from a health care professional identified by
the home CCG. This should include advice and information gathered from
professionals with a role in relation to the detained person’s health,
including the custodial healthcare provider
• Psychological advice and information from an educational psychologist.
The educational psychologist should consult any other psychologists known
to be involved with the detained person
• Advice from the person in charge of the relevant youth accommodation,
including advice and information from the education provider in that
accommodation
• Advice from the YOT responsible for the detained person
• Social care advice and information from or on behalf of the local authority,
including, if appropriate, children in need or child protection assessments,
or information from a looked after child’s care plan. In some cases, a
detained person may already have a child in need assessment or a child
protection plan from which information should be drawn for the EHC needs
assessment
• Advice and information in relation to preparation for adulthood and
independent living where the young person would have been in or beyond
Year 9 (if not for their detention)
• From any person requested by the appropriate person, where the local
authority considers it reasonable to do so (for example, they may suggest
consulting a GP or other health professional)
• Any other advice and information which the local authority considers
appropriate for a satisfactory assessment (for example, in the case of a
230

===== PAGE 231 =====
looked after child, from the Virtual School Head in the authority that looks
after the child)
10.92 The local authority must give those providing advice copies of any representations
made by the appropriate person, and any evidence submitted by or at the request of
the appropriate person. The local authority may also pass on the representations
and evidence provided from the person in charge of the relevant youth
accommodation, where the person in charge consents to this.
10.93 The whole process, from the point when an assessment is requested (or a detained
person is brought to the local authority’s attention) until the final EHC plan is issued,
must take no more than 20 weeks (subject to the exemptions set out paragraph
10.97).
10.94 The following specific requirements also apply:
• Local authorities must give their decision in response to any request for an
EHC needs assessment within 6 weeks from when the request was received
or the point at which a detained person was brought to the their attention
• When local authorities request information as part of the EHC needs
assessment process, those supplying the information must respond in a
timely manner and within 6 weeks from the date of the request
• If a local authority decides, following an EHC needs assessment, not to issue
an EHC plan, it must inform the appropriate person within 16 weeks from the
request for an EHC needs assessment. It must also notify those listed in
paragraph 10.71
10.95 When notifying the appropriate person of a decision not to issue an EHC plan, the
local authority must also notify them of their right to appeal that decision and the
time limit for doing so. It must also provide information concerning mediation and the
availability of SEN information and advice. The local authority should ensure that the
appropriate person is made aware of the resources available to meet SEN and
disability in the community within mainstream provision and through other support as
set out in the Local Offer.
10.96 If, following an EHC needs assessment, a local authority decides to issue an EHC
plan, the appropriate person must be given 15 days, beginning with the day on
which the plan was served, to consider and provide views on a draft EHC plan, to
ask for a particular school or other institution to be named in it and to request a
meeting with the local authority to discuss the plan, if they wish.
231

===== PAGE 232 =====
10.97 The whole process should be completed within 20 weeks from the date of the
request. There may be instances where it may not be reasonable to expect local
authorities and other partners to comply with the 20 week time limit. The Special
Educational Needs and Disability (Detained Persons) Regulations (2015) set out
specific exemptions. These include where:
• the educational institution is closed for at least 4 weeks, (which may delay
the submission of information from the school or other institution)
• exceptional personal circumstances affect the detained person or the
child’s parent. Being detained in youth custody in itself is not an exceptional
personal circumstance
• the child’s parent is absent from the area for a period of at least 4 weeks
10.98 The appropriate person should be informed if exemptions apply so that they are
aware of, and understand, the reason for any delays. All remaining elements of the
process should be completed within their prescribed periods wherever possible,
regardless of whether exemptions have delayed earlier elements.
10.99 In deciding whether an EHC plan is necessary for the detained person on release
from custody, the local authority should take into account whether the special
educational provision required to meet their needs can reasonably be provided from
within the resources normally available to schools and post-16 institutions or whether
an EHC plan may be needed to ensure that support is provided and co-ordinated
effectively for them on release from custody. Where, in the light of an assessment of
the detained person’s EHC needs, it is necessary for special educational provision to
be made in accordance with an EHC plan, the local authority must prepare a plan.
10.100 Local authorities should take into account that NHS England is the commissioner of
health services for detained persons, whereas on release the Clinical
Commissioning Group (CCG) where the detained person is ordinarily resident will
have responsibility for commissioning the health care element of the EHC plan.
10.101 The views of the home CCG will be crucial to finalising the health content of the EHC
plan. The commissioning of the healthcare element of the plan and the duty to
ensure it is delivered falls on that CCG after the detained person is released from
custody. Although the home CCG does not have statutory commissioning
responsibility while the detained person is in the relevant youth accommodation, as a
local partner the home CCG must co-operate with the local authority that is carrying
out an assessment of the detained person’s post-detention EHC needs. The views of
the home CCG must inform the final plan. The local authority and the home CCG
should work together with the providers of healthcare in the secure setting to ensure
any relevant healthcare information is available to inform the assessment process.
232

===== PAGE 233 =====
Preparing an EHC plan for a detained person in custody
10.102 In preparing a detained person’s EHC plan, local authorities and those contributing
to the preparation of the plan should follow the principles and requirements set out in
paragraph 9.61.
10.103 As in the community, the format of an EHC plan will be agreed locally. However, as a
statutory minimum, EHC plans must include the sections set out below, which must
be separately labelled from each other using the letters below. The content of each
is covered in detail in Chapter 9:
Section A: The views, interests and aspirations of the detained person and the
child’s parent.
Section B: The detained person’s special educational needs.
Section C: The detained person’s health needs which are related to their SEN.
Section D: The detained person’s social care needs which are related to their SEN
or to a disability.
Section E: The outcomes sought for the detained person on release. This should
include outcomes for adult life. The EHC plan should also identify the arrangements
for the setting of shorter term targets by the school, college or other education or
training provider.
Section F: The special educational provision required by the detained person on
release.
Section G: Any health provision reasonably required on release by the learning
difficulties or disabilities which result in the detained person having SEN. Where an
Individual Health Care Plan is made for them, that plan should be included.
Section H1: Any social care provision which must be made on release for a
detained person under 18 resulting from section 2 of the Chronically Sick and
Disabled Persons Act 1970.
Section H2: Any other social care provision reasonably required on release by the
learning difficulties or disabilities which result in the detained person having SEN.
This will include any adult social care provision being provided on release to meet a
young person’s eligible needs (through a statutory care and support plan) under the
Care Act 2014.
Section I: The name and type of the school, post-16 institution or other institution to
be attended by the detained person on release and the type of that institution (or,
233

===== PAGE 234 =====
where the name of a school or other institution is not specified in the EHC plan, the
type of school or other institution to be attended by the detained person on release).
Section J: Where any provision is to be secured by a Personal Budget post-
detention, the details of how the Personal Budget will support particular outcomes,
the provision it will be used for including any flexibility in its usage and the
arrangements for any direct payments for education, health and social care. The
special educational needs and outcomes that are to be met by any direct payment
must be specified.
Section K: The advice and information gathered during the EHC needs assessment
must be attached (in appendices). There should be a list of this advice and
information.
10.104 In addition, where the detained person would have been in or beyond Year 9, the
EHC plan must include (in sections F, G, H1 or H2 as appropriate) the provision
required by the detained person to assist in preparation for adulthood and
independent living, for example, support for finding employment, housing or for
participation in society.
10.105 The appropriate person’s right to request a particular school, college or other
institution in the EHC plan and the process for doing so are the same as set out from
paragraph 9.78. The local authority should ensure information is accessible for the
detained person.
Provision of information, advice and support
10.106 When securing a detained person’s EHC needs assessment the local authority must
consider whether the child or the appropriate person requires any information, advice
and support in order to enable them to take part effectively in the assessment. If it
considers that such information, advice or support is necessary the local authority
must provide it.
10.107 Further guidance on the provision of information, advice and support is covered in
Chapter 2.
Finalising the EHC plan
10.108 On completion, the local authority must send the finalised EHC plan to the
appropriate person, the person in charge of the relevant youth accommodation, the
YOT, the governing body, proprietor or principal of any school or other institution
named in the EHC plan, the home CCG and NHS England. The YOT should share
the plan with the detained person’s custodial case manager to inform the work of key
personnel who will be involved in delivering the detained person’s sentence plan
234

===== PAGE 235 =====
including the health and education providers. Where the EHC needs assessment
process is completed after release, the local authority must send the finalised EHC
plan to the appropriate person, the governing body, proprietor or principal of any
school or other institution named in the EHC plan and the CCG, and should send the
finalised plan to the YOT.
10.109 Where an EHC plan has been issued while the detained person is still in custody the
local authority must keep the EHC plan while they remain in custody and arrange
the provision in the plan (as set out in paragraphs 10.123 to 10.127). Whilst
undertaking these duties they should ensure the least possible disruption to the
detained person’s education and health support, given that they will already be
taking part in a learning programme and receiving any necessary health care that will
be based on their assessed needs when they entered into custody.
10.110 When the detained person is released the local authority must maintain the EHC
plan and review it as soon as possible following the guidance in the section on
‘Review on release from youth custody’ see (paragraphs 10.134 to 10.138).
Partial assessment on entry to or exit from custody
10.111 Where a detained person is part way through an assessment of special educational
needs or the development of an EHC plan on entry to custody, the local authority
must continue and complete the process following the guidance set out in this
section.
10.112 The majority of children and young people in custody will be serving short sentences.
In most cases the EHC needs assessment process and plan will not have been
completed before the detained person is released. The local authority must continue
and complete the process in the community following the guidance in Chapter 9
(separate provisions apply if the person is released to a new authority – these are
addressed in paragraphs 10.139 to 10.141).
10.113 The timeframes and process for completing an incomplete assessment do not start
afresh because a detained person is released or a child or young person is
detained. For example, the local authority must ensure that any EHC plan is
finalised with 20 weeks. It must also ensure that a decision on whether or not to
secure an EHC needs assessment is made within 6 weeks and that any decision not
to secure an EHC plan is made with 16 weeks.
10.114 To achieve this, the Regulations allow a local authority to treat steps taken in respect
of an EHC needs assessment in the community as satisfying steps which are
required to be taken for a detained persons EHC needs assessment. (Regulation
15(2) and (5) of the Special Educational Needs and Disability (Detained Persons)
Regulations 2015.) This is referred to in the Special Educational Needs and
235

===== PAGE 236 =====
Disability Regulations 2015 ‘the 2015 Regulations’ as ‘comparable
requirements’. This is intended to provide local authorities with flexibility. For
instance, where a local authority has provided notification to the relevant bodies that
it intends to carry out an assessment (under Regulation 4(2) of the Special
Educational Needs and Disability Regulations 2014 ‘the 2014 Regulations’) there
may be no need to do so again under the 2015 Regulations, where the local
authority is satisfied that this is reasonable. Where a local authority has consulted a
parent or young person at the outset of the process (under Regulation 3 of the 2014
Regulations) there may be no need to do so again following a detention, where the
local authority considers this reasonable. A local authority may decide that, given the
change in circumstances, it would be better to repeat a step. For example, the
authority would like to have input from the youth offending team and the person in
charge of the relevant youth accommodation. It is essential that detained persons
are assessed as promptly as possible (in detention or upon release) to ensure that
any required provision is in place as soon as possible.
Transfer between places of relevant youth accommodation
10.115 The YOT must notify the local authority when a detained person has been
transferred from one place of relevant youth accommodation to another. If the
detained person has an EHC plan the local authority must send it to the person in
charge of the new relevant youth accommodation within five working days of them
becoming aware of the transfer. NHS England should ensure that the new custodial
healthcare provider receives the EHC plan.
10.116 If the detained person is part way through an assessment or the development of an
EHC plan when they transfer from one place of relevant youth accommodation to
another, the local authority and the appropriate CCG must continue and complete
the process following the guidance set out in this section. The local authority must
ensure that any EHC plan is finalised within 20 weeks. Anything already completed
in relation to an EHC needs assessment by the person in charge of the relevant
youth accommodation, including information and advice received, may be treated as
having been completed in relation to the new relevant youth accommodation.
Appeals and mediation
10.117 The appropriate person during the period of detention can appeal to the First-tier
Tribunal (SEN and Disability) about:
• a decision by a local authority not to carry out an EHC needs assessment
• a decision by a local authority that it is not necessary to issue an EHC plan
following an assessment
236

===== PAGE 237 =====
• the school or other institution or type of school or other institution (such as
mainstream school/college) specified in the plan as appropriate for the
detained person on their release from custody or that no school or other
institution is specified
10.118 Before registering an SEN appeal with the Tribunal the appropriate person must
consider mediation unless an exemption applies. Further information on mediation
and the Tribunal is set out in Chapter 11 on Resolving Disagreements.
10.119 The local authority should work with the YOT and the person in charge of the
relevant youth accommodation to ensure that the mediation information session can
take place and that the detained person is able to participate in mediation if they
choose to go to mediation. When a parent is a party to the mediation, the child (with
the agreement of the parent, the mediator and the person in charge of the relevant
youth accommodation) may also attend. Young persons placed in relevant youth
accommodation may not be able to leave the establishment due to security risks.
Most mediation sessions should therefore take place in the relevant youth
accommodation and in some cases it may be appropriate for mediation to take place
via a video link. However, in such cases, careful consideration should be given as to
whether this is accessible for the detained person. The person in charge of the
relevant youth accommodation must co-operate and support this process by
providing local authorities with access to the detained person for the purpose of
mediation sessions. The reasonable expenses of the detained person’s parent
attending mediation must be met by the local authority.
10.120 The person in charge of the relevant youth accommodation should also ensure
arrangements are in place to enable the young person to attend a Tribunal where an
appeal is made. Again, there may be security considerations involved and in some
cases a Tribunal hearing could take place via a video link but only where this is
accessible the young person.
Keeping an EHC plan and arranging special educational provision
10.121 Where a detained person has an EHC plan at the time of entering custody, or where
an EHC plan is finalised in custody, local authorities must keep the plan while the
detained person is in custody and must arrange appropriate special educational
provision while they are in custody. They should work closely with the person in
charge of the relevant youth accommodation who must co-operate with the local
authority to enable them to fulfil this duty.
10.122 While the detained person is in custody the local authority must not amend the EHC
plan, carry out a reassessment or cease to maintain the EHC plan.
237

===== PAGE 238 =====
10.123 The local authority must arrange the special educational provision specified in the
EHC plan. In practice the educational provision in relevant youth accommodation,
including for additional support that detained persons may need as part of an EHC
plan, will be delivered by an education provider under contractual arrangements with
the YJB or custodial operator and commissioned and funded centrally. Local
authorities should work closely with providers to arrange the provision. The local
authority should seek to do this as soon as possible on the detained person entering
custody, using the custodial establishment’s and YOT’s existing planning
procedures wherever possible.
10.124 It may not always be practicable to deliver the exact provision set out in the EHC
plan, for example, if the EHC plan specifies a named individual in the detained
person’s home area to provide a service. Where provision is not currently available
within the relevant youth accommodation it does not necessarily mean that it is
impracticable for it to be arranged. Where it is not practicable to arrange specified
provision in the EHC plan, the local authority must arrange provision as close as
possible to it and should work with the person in charge of the relevant youth
accommodation and the education provider to identify how to do so, focusing on the
outcomes in the plan. Local authorities should ensure that the appropriate person is
fully involved in the process.
10.125 If it appears to the local authority that the special educational provision specified in
the plan is no longer appropriate for the person, where for example the detained
person’s needs have changed since their last EHC plan review or they have
previously unidentified needs, the local authority must arrange special educational
provision that is appropriate for the detained person. Before deciding that the
educational provision set out in the EHC plan is no longer appropriate, local
authorities should seek appropriate professional advice and work with the custodial
case manager, the YOT, the person in charge of the relevant youth accommodation
(as well as the education provider) and the appropriate person to review the detained
person’s needs taking into account the information in the EHC plan, the literacy and
numeracy assessment and any other assessment of the detained person’s needs.
On release, the local authority must review the EHC plan and if the special
educational provision specified in the plan is no longer appropriate this should also
trigger a reassessment of the child or young person’s needs.
10.126 Speech and language therapy is usually recorded as education provision in section F
of EHC plans (see paragraph 9.74 for further information) and where it is, it must be
arranged by the local authority. However in practice, when undertaking this duty in
relevant youth accommodation, the local authority should work with NHS England,
and any providers of speech and language therapy who are contracted and funded
centrally by NHS England, to deliver it within the framework of services already
provided to the establishment.
238

===== PAGE 239 =====
10.127 Custodial sentences for detained persons are often short. It is therefore important for
decisions to be made as soon as possible to enable the provision to be put in place
without delay. Local authorities and the person in charge of the relevant youth
accommodation should also ensure that the process for making decisions is clear,
robust and transparent. Local authorities should keep records of the decisions they
have made and the reasons for those decisions and make those records available to
the appropriate person, the YOT and the education or training institution the detained
person will be attending upon release.
Arranging health care provision for detained children and young
people with EHC plans
10.128 Where a detained person has an EHC plan that specifies healthcare provision, NHS
England must arrange appropriate health care provision while the detained person is
in custody. In practice this will be carried out by a health services provider under its
contractual arrangements with NHS England. NHS England should make the
arrangements below when commissioning health services in the relevant youth
accommodation.
10.129 It may not always be practicable to deliver the exact provision as set out in the EHC
plan if, for example, the plan is specific to local health professionals or services.
Where it appears impracticable to provide exactly what is in the plan, NHS England’s
commissioning arrangements must ensure that the health care provider arranges
provision as close as possible to that in the plan, if it is still appropriate. In practice,
although the judgment about what is practical falls to NHS England, its views will be
influenced by the advice from the provider.
10.130 If it appears that the health care support specified in the plan is no longer
appropriate, NHS England’s commissioning arrangements must ensure that the
health care provider arranges appropriate alternative healthcare support for the
detained person. This may be the case if, for example, the health needs have
changed since the detained person’s last EHC plan review. Again, the assessment
of what is no longer appropriate will be informed by the provider’s views, although
the judgment ultimately falls to NHS England. If it appears that the health care
support specified in the plan is no longer appropriate this should trigger a
reassessment of the detained person’s EHC needs upon release.
10.131 The Comprehensive Health Assessment Tool should remain key when identifying
what health provision in the plan can and should continue to be provided for detained
persons with an EHC plan in custody. It may also pick up additional health needs.
The process for making decisions about health provision should be clear, robust and
transparent taking into account the information in the EHC plan, the CHAT
assessment and any other assessment of the detained person’s needs.
239

===== PAGE 240 =====
Monitoring provision in custody
10.132 The local authority must promote the fulfilment of the detained person’s learning
potential whilst they are in custody and on their release. Local authorities should use
the EHC plan to actively monitor progress towards these and other long term
outcomes.
10.133 Where a detained person is in custody within a year of the last review of their EHC
plan, the local authority should conduct a monitoring meeting and continue to do so,
as a minimum, every 12 months. The monitoring meeting should consider the special
educational and health provision arranged for the detained person in custody and the
appropriateness of the provision in the EHC plan in light of the detained person’s
progress or changed circumstances. If the provision in the EHC plan appears
inappropriate the local authority should follow the guidance set out in paragraph
10.125. The local authority can request that the person in charge of the relevant
youth accommodation or YOT convenes the monitoring meeting. Further guidance
on best practice is given in Chapter 9, Education, health and care needs
assessments and plans.
Review on release from youth custody
10.134 To support a detained person’s transition from custody, the local authority and YOT
should seek to review the detained person’s educational progress and their
continuing special educational and health needs in preparation for their release,
using the YOT’s existing release planning procedures wherever possible.
10.135 The YOT must notify the local authority that a detained person is due to be released
from the relevant youth accommodation in order to inform the resettlement process
and should ensure all external agencies are aware of their responsibilities under the
proposed release plan, and condition of licence or Notice of Supervision. The local
authority should inform any relevant community services that the detained person is
due to be released.
10.136 If the detained person had an EHC plan before entering custody or was issued with
an EHC plan while they were in custody, the responsible local authority must keep
the plan while the detained person is in custody and must review it as soon as
possible on release. The review must focus on the detained person’s progress
towards achieving the outcomes specified in the EHC plan and local authorities
must follow the process set out in Chapter 9, Education, Health and Care needs
assessments and plans. Local authorities should work with the YOT to take account
of the condition of licence or Notice of Supervision when reviewing the EHC plan. If
the EHC plan was issued while the detained person was in custody the review
should specifically consider sections I and J of the EHC plan.
240

===== PAGE 241 =====
10.137 Professionals across education, health and social care are expected to co-operate
with local authorities during reviews and the relevant healthcare commissioner must
agree the healthcare provision to be included in a revised plan.
10.138 Local authorities, CCGs and NHS England must co-operate to ensure the health
needs of detained persons whilst in custody and on release are considered in
developing the local Joint Strategic Needs Assessment and the Joint Health and
Wellbeing Strategy.
Moving to a new local authority on release
10.139 If the detained person is due to be released to a new local authority the YOT must
notify the local authority where the detained person is ordinarily resident (the old
local authority) and the new local authority in whose area the YOT expects the
detained person to live on release from the relevant youth accommodation. The old
authority must send the EHC plan to the new authority within 5 working days of
being informed of the move. The new authority will become responsible for
maintaining the plan and for securing the special educational provision specified in it.
10.140 Where the detained person’s move results in a new CCG becoming responsible for
the detained person, the new local authority must send the EHC plan to the new
CCG within 5 working days of becoming responsible for maintaining the plan. Where
it is not practicable for the new CCG to secure the health provision specified in the
EHC plan, the new CCG must, within 15 working days of receiving a copy of the
EHC plan, request the new local authority to make an EHC needs assessment or
review the EHC plan. The new local authority must comply with any request.
10.141 If the detained person is released to a new local authority before the EHC needs
assessment process has been completed the new local authority should consider
whether it needs to carry out an EHC needs assessment. The new authority should
take account of the fact that the old authority decided to carry out an EHC needs
assessment (and should seek information concerning the assessment from the old
local authority) when making its decision. The new local authority is not bound by the
requirements specified in paragraph 10.113. The new local authority should draw on
the expertise and knowledge of the YOT to continue the assessment process. (See
Chapter 9 for more information about children and young people moving between
local authorities).
Looked after children remanded or sentenced to custody
10.142 For the purposes of this section a looked after child refers to a child or young person
who is under 18.
10.143 Under the Legal Aid, Sentencing and Punishment of Offenders Act 2012, children
remanded to relevant youth accommodation become looked after children for the
241

===== PAGE 242 =====
period for which they are remanded. This includes those who had previously been
accommodated under the Children Act 1989. However, if a looked after child, who
has previously been accommodated by a local authority under section 20 of the
Children Act, is remanded to relevant youth accommodation he or she will no longer
be looked after under section 20 as they are no longer voluntarily accommodated by
the local authority. (A child who is looked after by a local authority as defined by
Section 22 of the Children Act 1989 means a child who is voluntarily accommodated
by a local authority or who is subject to a care order or interim care order.) Children
who offend and receive a custodial sentence remain looked after if they were under
a care order immediately prior to conviction.
10.144 If a looked after child is living in an out-of-authority placement prior to going into
custody, the request for an assessment must be carried out by the local authority
where the child lived before entering custody (i.e. where they are ordinarily resident),
which may not be the same as the local authority that looks after the child. The CCG
where the child is ordinarily resident has responsibility for the health element of the
EHC needs assessment and the development of the health content of the plan. If a
disagreement arises, the local authority that looks after the child, will act as the
‘corporate parent’ in any disagreement resolution, as described in Chapter 11.
10.145 If a looked after child was placed out of authority before going into custody and
enters custody with an EHC plan, or one is finalised while they are in custody, the
local authority where the child lived before entering custody (i.e. where they are
ordinarily resident), must arrange appropriate special educational provision for the
detained person while he or she is detained. Further information on support for
looked after children is set out at the beginning of this chapter.
Transition from youth justice to a custodial establishment for
adults
10.146 When a detained person is transferred to an adult custodial establishment the
person in charge of the relevant youth accommodation should ensure that all
relevant SEN information, including the EHC plan, is passed to the receiving
establishment prior to transfer taking place, so that any additional support needs can
be taken into account by the receiving establishment. The SEN duties in the Children
and Families Act 2014 no longer apply once a young person is transferred to the
adult secure estate.
Education on release for those in a custodial establishment for
adults
10.147 If a detained person in an adult custodial establishment had an EHC plan
immediately before custody, or if they were issued with a plan while in relevant youth
accommodation, and if they are still under the age of 25 when they are released from
242

===== PAGE 243 =====
custody, the local authority must maintain and review the EHC plan if the young
person plans to stay in education. When reviewing the plan local authorities must
follow the processes set out in Chapter 9, in particular the section on 19- to 25-year-
olds.
10.148 If the young person plans to continue their education on release, the Offenders'
Learning and Skills Service provider and the National Careers Service provider
should liaise to ensure the responsible local authority can review the EHC plan as
soon as possible.
Cross-border detention
10.149 Local authorities in England should support detained persons with EHC plans whose
home authority is in England but who are detained in Wales in the same way that
they support detained persons whose home authority is in England and who are
placed in England. Local authorities in England should work with the person in
charge of relevant youth accommodation and the Local Health Board to meet the
needs of detained persons with EHC plans whose home authority is in England
when they are detained in Wales.
10.150 Until the SEN legal framework is changed in Wales, host local authorities in England
will be obliged to fulfill their best endeavors duty for detained persons with
statements under Section 562C of the Education Act 1996 whose home authority is
in Wales but who are detained in Young Offender Institutions in England.
243

===== PAGE 244 =====
11 Resolving disagreements
What this chapter covers
This chapter is primarily about resolving disagreements between parents or young
people and early years providers, schools, colleges, local authorities or health
commissioners. It:
• supports early resolution of disagreements at the local level
• explains the independent disagreement resolution arrangements which local
authorities must make available for disagreements across special educational
provision, and health and care provision in relation to Education, Health and
Care (EHC) plans
• also explains the independent mediation arrangements which parents and
young people can use before deciding whether to appeal to the First-tier
Tribunal (Special Educational Needs (SEN) and Disability) (‘the Tribunal’) and
for health and social care complaints in relation to EHC plans
• goes on to describe the conditions for appealing to the Tribunal or making
disability discrimination claims. It finishes by describing other complaints
procedures and health and social services complaints procedures
Relevant legislation
Primary
The Children and Families Act 2014 Sections 51 – 57 and 60
The Children Act 1989, section 26
The Education Act 1996, Section 496 and 497
The Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007
The Equality Act 2010
The Legal Aid, Sentencing and Punishment of Offenders Act 2012
Regulations
The Special Educational Needs Regulations 2014
The Children Act 1989 Representations Procedure Regulations 2006
The Tribunal Procedure (First-tier Tribunal) (Health, Education and Social Care
Chamber) Rules 2008
244

===== PAGE 245 =====
The Local Authority Social Services and National Health Service Complaints
Regulations 2009
The Education (Independent School Standards) Regulations 2010
Principles for resolving disagreements
11.1 The guidance in this chapter on resolving disagreements is based on the following
principles:
• Decisions about provision for children and young people with SEN or
disabilities should be made jointly by providers, parents, and children and
young people themselves, taking a person-centred approach, with the views
of children, young people and parents taken into account when those
decisions are made
• Relations between education, health and social care services and parents and
young people should be marked by open communication so that parents and
young people know where they are in the decision-making process, their
knowledge and experience can be used to support good decision-making and
they know the reasons why decisions have been made
• Parents and young people should be given information and, where necessary,
support so that they can take part in decision-making and complaints
processes. Support can be provided by statutory or voluntary organisations
• Local authorities must make known to parents and young people the
possibility of resolving disagreements across education, health and social
care through disagreement resolution and mediation procedures and
education, health and social care providers (such as those listed in paragraph
iv. in the Introduction) should have complaints procedures which, along with
details about appealing to the Tribunal, should be made known to parents and
young people through the local authority’s Information, Advice and Support
Service (see Chapter 2, Impartial information, advice and support)
11.2 The following table gives a summary of the people and bodies which can consider
complaints about decisions and provision in relation to children and young people
with education, health and care needs. Text in the rest of this chapter gives more
detail about who can deal with complaints. Parents and young people should use the
complaints procedures of local providers (schools, colleges etc) before raising their
complaints with others.
245

===== PAGE 246 =====
Children and young people with education, health and care needs – avenues for complaint and redress
Early years/ Provision Decision Undergoing Decision EHC plan Disability Health Social care
school/ for not to EHC not to issue discrimination complaints complaints
college individual assess assessment EHC plan
provision CYP incl
those with
SEN but no
plan
Early years   
provider
School   
College   
DfE/School  
Complaints (LA maintained (LA
Unit schools) maintained
schools)
EFA  
(Academies, (Academies,
sixth form sixth form
colleges) colleges)
SFA  
(General FE (General FE
colleges) colleges)
Secretary       
of State (Independent (in LA
Schools) maintained
schools)
Ofsted 
(Early years &
LA maintained
schools and
academies as a
whole)
Local      
authority (LA maintained (about non-
schools) provision of
education &
social care)
246

===== PAGE 247 =====
Early years/ Provision Decision Undergoing Decision EHC plan Disability Health Social care
school/ for not to EHC not to issue discrimination complaints complaints
college individual assess assessment EHC plan
provision CYP incl
those with
SEN but no
plan
Local     
Government (maladmini- (maladmini- (maladmini- (about non
Ombudsman stration, stration) stration) provision of
delay etc) education &
social care)
Disagreement      
resolution (how providers (about
services carry out duties) sections E,
H and C in
the plan)
Mediation   
(about
sections E,
H and C in
the plan)
First-tier    
Tribunal (about (in schools)
(SEND) education in
the plan)
County Court 
(in early years,
post-16, LAs)
NHS  
complaints (about health
provision in
plan)
Parliamentary  
and Health (with the
Service LGO)
Ombudsman
247

===== PAGE 248 =====
Early resolution of disagreements
11.3 Decisions about provision for children and young people with SEN should be
made as soon as possible. In most cases this will be achieved by early years
providers, schools, colleges, local authorities and clinical commissioning groups
(CCGs) working closely together and agreeing what should be provided with
parents and young people.
11.4 However, where agreement cannot be reached, early resolution of disagreements
benefits parents and young people and can avoid unnecessary stress and
expense. The local Information, Advice and Support Service, described in Chapter
2, can provide access to support for parents and young people in arranging and
attending meetings.
Disagreement resolution arrangements and mediation
11.5 While ‘disagreement resolution’ and ‘mediation’ are often used interchangeably,
under the Children and Families Act 2014 they refer to different processes.
Disagreement resolution arrangements apply more widely and are distinct from
the mediation arrangements set out in paragraphs 11.13 to 11.38 below which
apply specifically to parents and young people who are considering appealing to
the Tribunal about EHC needs assessments and the special educational element
of an EHC plan or who want mediation on the health and social care elements of
an EHC plan. However, local authorities may contract disagreement resolution
services and mediation from the same providers. Whereas parents and young
people must contact a mediation adviser before registering an appeal about EHC
needs assessments or the SEN element of an EHC plan they do not have to
engage with the disagreement resolution services at any time, including before
registering an appeal.
Disagreement resolution services
11.6 Local authorities must make disagreement resolution services available to parents
and young people. Use of the disagreement resolution services is voluntary and
has to be with the agreement of all parties. The service, while commissioned by it,
must be independent of the local authority – no-one who is directly employed by a
local authority can provide disagreement resolution services. Parents and young
people can also access informal support in resolving disagreements through the
local impartial Information, Advice and Support Service and, between 2014 and
2016, with the help of independent supporters.
11.7 Disagreement resolution arrangements cover all children and young people with
SEN, not just those who are being assessed for or have an EHC plan, and a
range of disagreements, as set out in paragraph 11.8. They are available to
248

===== PAGE 249 =====
parents and young people to resolve disagreements about any aspect of SEN
provision, and health and social care disagreements during the processes related
to EHC needs assessments and EHC plans set out in Chapter 9. They can
provide a quick and non-adversarial way of resolving disagreements. Used early in
the process of EHC needs assessment and EHC plan development they can
prevent the need for mediation, once decisions have been taken in that process,
and appeals to the Tribunal.
11.8 The disagreement resolution service is to help resolve four types of disagreement
or to prevent them from escalating further:
• The first is between parents or young people and local authorities, the
governing bodies of maintained schools and maintained nursery schools,
early years providers, further education institutions or the proprietors of
academies (including free schools), about how these authorities, bodies
or proprietors are carrying out their education, health and care duties for
children and young people with SEN, whether they have EHC plans or
not. These include duties on the local authority to keep their education
and care provision under review, the duties to assess needs and draw up
EHC plans and the duty on governing bodies and proprietors to use their
best endeavours to meet children and young people’s SEN
• The second is disagreements between parents or young people and
early years providers, schools or post-16 institutions about the special
educational provision made for a child or young person, whether they
have EHC plans or not
• The third is disagreements between parents or young people and CCGs
or local authorities about health or social care provision during EHC
needs assessments, while EHC plans are being drawn up, reviewed or
when children or young people are being reassessed. Disagreement
resolution services can also be used to resolve disagreements over
special educational provision throughout assessments, the drawing up of
EHC plans, while waiting for Tribunal appeals and at review or during
re-assessments
• the fourth is disagreements between local authorities and health
commissioning bodies during EHC needs assessments or
re-assessments, the drawing up of EHC plans or reviews of those plans
for children and young people with SEN. In relation to EHC plans, this
includes the description of the child or young person’s education, health
and care needs and any education, health and care provision set out in
the plan. These disagreements do not involve parents and young people.
249

===== PAGE 250 =====
11.9 Local authorities must make the availability of disagreement resolution services
known to parents, young people, headteachers, governing bodies, proprietors and
principals of schools and post-16 institutions in their areas and should make them
known to others they think appropriate. Details of the disagreement resolution
arrangements must be set out in the Local Offer.
11.10 A decision by parents and young people not to use disagreement resolution
services has no effect on their right to appeal to the Tribunal and no inference will
be drawn by the Tribunal if the parties to a disagreement have not used the
disagreement resolution services. Disagreement resolution meetings are
confidential and without prejudice to the Tribunal process and the Tribunal will
disregard any offers or comments made during them. Partial agreement achieved
by use of disagreement resolution services can help to focus on the remaining
areas of disagreement in any subsequent appeals to the Tribunal.
Contracting disagreement resolution services
11.11 In contracting an effective disagreement resolution service, local authorities
should:
• take responsibility for the overall standard of the service
• have clear funding and budgeting plans for the service – parents and
young people should not be charged for the use of the service and
schools, colleges and early years providers should be clear about how
the service can be accessed and how it will be funded
• ensure that the service is impartial
• ensure that the service has a development plan which sets out clear
targets and is regularly reviewed
• ensure that the independent persons appointed as facilitators:
have the appropriate skills, knowledge and expertise in
o
disagreement resolution
have an understanding of SEN processes, procedures and
o
legislation
have no role in the decisions taken about a particular case, nor any
o
vested interest in the terms of the settlement
maintain confidentiality
o
250

===== PAGE 251 =====
carry out the process quickly and to the timetable decided by the
o
parties
• establish protocols and mechanisms for referring parents and young
people to disagreement resolution and, where necessary, provide
advocacy support to help them take part
• establish a service level agreement for delivering the service which sets
out the appropriate standards expected of, and the responsibilities
delegated to, the provider. There should be appropriate arrangements for
overseeing, regularly monitoring and reviewing the performance of the
service, taking account of local and national best practice, and
• seek feedback from the service to inform and influence local authority
and provider decisions on SEN policies, procedures and practices
11.12 Parents and young people can also use the complaints procedures set out in
paragraphs 11.67 to 11.111 in addition to these disagreement resolution
arrangements. There is no requirement to have used the disagreement resolution
services before using those other complaints procedures, and disagreement
resolution services can be used before, at the same time or after those
procedures.
Mediation
11.13 As paragraph 11.5 points out, the Children and Families Act 2014 makes a
distinction between disagreement resolution arrangements and mediation. If
parents or young people want it to, mediation can take place following decisions
by a local authority not to carry out an EHC needs assessment, not to draw up an
EHC plan, after they receive a final EHC plan or amended plan, following a
decision not to amend an EHC plan or a decision to cease to maintain an EHC
plan. These mediation arrangements complement the disagreement resolution
arrangements set out in paragraphs 11.5 to 11.10. The disagreement resolution
arrangements are designed to resolve disagreements about the performance of
duties, SEN provision, disagreements over health and social care provision and
disagreements between health commissioners and local authorities and are
voluntary for both parties (see paragraph 11.8). The mediation arrangements are
specifically linked to decisions about EHC needs assessments and plans.
Disagreement resolution services can be used at any time, if both parties agree,
including while an EHC needs assessment is being conducted, while the plan is
being drawn up, after the plan is finalised or while an appeal is going through the
Tribunal process.
251

===== PAGE 252 =====
Contracting services for mediation and mediation information
11.14 Local authorities must make arrangements for parents and young people to
receive information about mediation so that they can take part in mediation if they
so choose before a possible appeal to the Tribunal.
11.15 Local authorities and relevant health commissioners are free to choose how they
make arrangements to provide mediation information and mediation, whether that
is by contracting a mediation provider or providers or otherwise. Any mediation
provision – by a mediation adviser (providing information) or mediator (conducting
mediation) – must be independent of local authorities in England and/or relevant
health commissioners. No one who is directly employed by a local authority in
England can be a mediation adviser and no one who is directly employed by a
local authority in England or a relevant health commissioner can act as a
mediator. People who are contracted to act as mediators should have received
accredited mediation training. The guidance on arranging effective disagreement
resolution services (paragraph 11.11) provides a good guide for the arrangements
which should be made for mediation services.
11.16 Local authorities must set out the arrangements they have made for securing
mediation information services and mediation itself in the Local Offer.
Routes to mediation
11.17 The Children and Families Act 2014 sets out two pathways for going to mediation
depending on whether the parent or young person wants to go to mediation about
the matters which can be appealed to the Tribunal (see paragraph 11.45) or
whether they want to go to mediation about the health and social care elements of
EHC plans.
Mediation on matters which can be appealed to the Tribunal
11.18 Parents and young people who wish to make an appeal to the Tribunal (see
paragraphs 11.39 to 11.52) may do so only after they have contacted an
independent mediation adviser and discussed whether mediation might be a
suitable way of resolving the disagreement.
11.19 When the local authority sends the parent or young person notice of a decision
which can be appealed to the Tribunal it must tell the parent or young person of
their right to go to mediation and that they must contact a mediation adviser
before registering an appeal with the Tribunal. The notice must give the contact
details of a mediation adviser, contain the timescales for requesting mediation and
the contact details of any person acting on behalf of the local authority who the
parent or young person should contact if they wish to pursue mediation. The
252

===== PAGE 253 =====
notice should also make clear that parents’ and young people’s right to appeal is
not affected by entering into mediation.
11.20 If the parent or young person is considering registering an appeal and has
contacted the mediation adviser, the adviser will provide information on mediation
and answer any questions which the parent or young person may have. The
information will normally be provided on the telephone, although information can
be provided in written form, through face-to-face meetings or through other means
if the parent or young person prefers.
Mediation advice before mediation
11.21 The mediation information which is given to parents and young people:
• should be factual and unbiased, and
• should not seek to pressure them into going to mediation. Where there is
more than one available, the mediation adviser should not try to persuade
the parents or young people to use any particular mediator
11.22 The mediation adviser should be ready to answer any questions from the parent or
young person and explain:
• that mediation is an informal, non-legalistic, accessible and simple
disagreement settlement process run by a trained third party and designed
to bring two parties together to clarify the issues, and reach a resolution
• that the parent or young person’s use of mediation is voluntary
• the timescales which must be met and the certificate, and
• that the local authority will pay reasonable travel expenses and other
expenses to the parent or young person taking part in mediation
11.23 Once the information has been provided it is for the parent or young person to
decide whether they want to go to mediation before any appeal they might make
to the Tribunal. Parents and young people have the right to appeal to the Tribunal
but are not able to register an appeal without a certificate and the local authority
must tell them this in the notice referred to in paragraph 11.19. Where the parent
or young person decides not to go to mediation during or following contact with the
mediation adviser the adviser will issue a certificate, within three working days of
the parent or young person telling them that they do not want to go to mediation,
confirming that information has been provided. The certificate will enable the
parent or young person to lodge their appeal, either within two months of the
original decision being sent by the local authority or within one month of receiving
the certificate whichever is the later.
253

===== PAGE 254 =====
Exceptions to the requirement to contact a mediation adviser
11.24 Parents and young people do not have to contact the mediation adviser prior to
registering their appeal with the Tribunal if their appeal is solely about the name of
the school, college or other institution named on the plan, the type of school,
college or other institution specified in the plan or the fact that no school or other
institution is named. Parents and young people will already have had the
opportunity to request a school, college or other institution and to discuss this in
detail with the local authority. The disagreement resolution arrangements, as set
out in paragraphs 11.5 to 11.10, would be available if parents or young people and
local authorities wanted to attempt to resolve the dispute about the placement by
making use of these arrangements.
11.25 The mediation advice arrangements do not apply to disability discrimination
claims.
Going to mediation about matters which can be appealed to the
Tribunal
11.26 If the parent or young person decides to proceed with mediation then the local
authority must ensure that a mediation session takes place within 30 days of the
mediation adviser informing the local authority that the parent or young person
wants to go to mediation, although it may delegate the arrangement of the session
to the mediator. Parents or young people do not have to pay for the mediation
session(s). The local authority must attend the mediation.
11.27 If the parent or young person wants to go to mediation then the local authority
must also take part. If the local authority is unable to arrange mediation in a case
which involves a disagreement on a matter which can be appealed to the Tribunal
within 30 days it must tell the mediator. The mediation adviser must then issue a
certificate within three days. On receipt of the certificate the parent or young
person could decide whether to appeal immediately or to wait for mediation to take
place. If the parent or young person initially indicates that they want to go to
mediation about a matter which can be appealed to the Tribunal but changes their
mind, they can contact the mediation adviser who can then issue a certificate with
which an appeal can be registered.
11.28 A mediation session or sessions which arise out of these arrangements must be
conducted by independent mediators. Once mediation is completed about a
matter which can be appealed to the Tribunal the mediation adviser must issue a
certificate to the parent or young person within three working days confirming that
it has concluded. Mediation will not always lead to complete agreement between
the parties and if the parent or young person still wants to appeal to the Tribunal
254

===== PAGE 255 =====
following mediation they must send the certificate to the Tribunal when they
register their appeal.
11.29 Parents and young people have one month from receiving the certificate to
register an appeal with the Tribunal or two months from the original decision by
the local authority whichever is the later. The certificate will not set out any details
about what happened in the mediation – it will simply state the mediation was
completed at a given date. When cases are registered with the Tribunal following
mediation the Tribunal will deal with the appeal on the facts of the case. The
Tribunal may cover similar ground to that explored in the mediation but will reach
its own independent findings and conclusions. Mediation meetings are confidential
and without prejudice to the Tribunal process and the Tribunal will disregard any
offers or comments made during them. Partial agreement achieved through
mediation can help to focus any subsequent appeals to the Tribunal on the
remaining areas of disagreement.
11.30 The Special Educational Needs and Disability Regulations 2014 set out time limits
for local authorities to implement agreements made at mediation. If the local
authority does not implement the agreements within the set time limits, or ones
which have been agreed with the parents or young people instead, the parents or
young person can appeal to the Tribunal if it is a matter which can be appealed
(see paragraphs 11.45 and 11.46).
Mediation on the health and social care elements of an EHC plan
11.31 Parents and young people can also go to mediation about the health and social
care elements of an EHC plan. However, unlike matters which can be appealed to
the Tribunal, parents and young people do not have to receive mediation advice
before going to mediation. (Health and social care provision which educates or
trains a child or young person is treated as special educational provision, rather
than health and social care provision, and can be appealed to the Tribunal and the
parent or young person would have to contact a mediation adviser before
appealing about that provision.)
11.32 The notice which is sent to the parent or young person by the local authority with
the final EHC plan or the final amended plan must tell the parent or young person
that they can go to mediation about the health and care aspects of the plan and
give contact details of someone acting on behalf of the local authority who the
parent or young person should contact if they want to go to mediation. When
contacting the local authority the parent or young person must tell the local
authority about the matters they wish to go to mediation about. In particular, they
must inform the local authority if they want to go to mediation about the fact that
no health care provision or no health care provision of a particular kind, is
255

===== PAGE 256 =====
specified in the plan and they must also inform the local authority of the health
care provision which he or she wishes to be specified in the plan.
11.33 If the parent or young person wants to go to mediation about the health care
matters set out in paragraph 11.32 then the local authority must inform each
relevant commissioning body within three working days about those matters.
11.34 If the parent or young person has told the local authority that they disagree with
either the education and social care element of the plan or the health and one or
both of the education and social care elements then the local authority must
arrange the mediation, after the parent or young person has contacted the
mediation adviser in a case involving the education element of the plan. If the
parent or young person only wants to appeal about the health care aspect of the
plan then the responsible health commissioning body or bodies must arrange for
mediation between them and the parent or young person, ensure that the
mediation is conducted by an independent person who is not employed by a
clinical commissioning group or the National Health Service Commissioning
Board, and take part in the mediation. The health commissioning body or bodies
must also take part in the mediation arranged by the local authority if the
mediation is about the health care element of the plan and either or both of the
education or social care parts of the plan. They must pay the reasonable
expenses of the parent or young person where they arrange the mediation.
11.35 If the responsible health commissioning body or bodies are responsible for
arranging a mediation which is solely about the health care elements of the plan
then they must do so within 30 days of being informed by the local authority.
11.36 Mediation offers a relatively quick way of resolving disagreements about the health
and social care elements of an EHC plan. It may not resolve those disagreements
or may not resolve all of them. If there is no resolution of the parent’s or young
person’s disagreement with the health and/or social care elements of the plan
then they cannot appeal to the Tribunal. Parents and young people could at this
point request that the responsible commissioning body in the case of the health
care element of the plan or the local authority in the case of the social care
element goes to disagreement resolution, although the health commissioning body
and the local authority would be under no duty to do so and given that the
disagreements have not been resolved at mediation the health commissioning
body and the local authority are unlikely to agree. The mediation arrangements for
the health and social care elements of an EHC plan lie alongside the health and
social care arrangements set out in paragraphs 11.101 to 11.111. Going to
mediation about the health and social care elements of an EHC plan does not
prevent a parent or young person also complaining via the routes set out in
256

===== PAGE 257 =====
paragraphs 11.101 to 11.111 and vice versa nor does going to mediation prevent
a parent or young person subsequently complaining via those routes.
11.37 Despite there being two routes to mediation the right to go to mediation about the
education, health and social care elements of an EHC plan provides an
opportunity for disagreements about a plan to be dealt with at one venue and dealt
with holistically. Where parents or young people have disagreements about more
than one element of the plan, including the educational element, the local authority
should not arrange the mediation until the parent or young person has contacted
the mediation adviser and decided whether they want to go to mediation about the
educational element of the plan, so that one mediation can be arranged covering
all areas of disagreement.
Effective mediation
11.38 For mediation to work well:
• the mediation session should be arranged, in discussion with the parents
or young people, at a place and a time which is convenient for the parties
to the disagreement. The body (or bodies) arranging the mediation must
inform the parent or young person of the date and place of the mediation
at least 5 working days before the mediation unless the parent or young
person consents to this period of time being reduced
• the mediator should play a key role in clarifying the nature of the
disagreement and ensuring that both sides are ready for the mediation
session. The mediator should agree with the parties on who needs to be
there
• mediators must have sufficient knowledge of the legislation relating to
SEN, health and social care to be able to conduct the mediation
• the local authority and health commissioner representative(s) should be
sufficiently senior and have the authority to be able to make decisions
during the mediation session
• the parents or young person may be accompanied by a friend, adviser or
advocate and, in the case of parents, the child, where the parent
requests this and the local authority has no reasonable objection. In
cases where parents are the party to the mediation and it is not
appropriate for the child to attend in person the mediator should take
reasonable steps (within terms of time, difficulty, expense etc) to obtain
the views of the child. Young people with learning difficulties, in
particular, may need advocacy support when taking part in mediation
257

===== PAGE 258 =====
• both parties should be open about all the aspects of the disagreement
and not hold anything back for a possible appeal to the Tribunal on the
SEN aspects of EHC plans
• where a solicitor has acted as the mediator, under the Solicitors’ Code of
Conduct (rule 3 Conflict of interests), he or she should not also represent
either party at the Tribunal
• generally, legal representation should not be necessary at the mediation,
but this will be a matter for the parties and the mediator to agree. If either
party does have legal representation they will have to pay for it
themselves
Children and young people in youth custody
Please see Chapter 10, paragraphs 10.76 to 10.78.
Registering an appeal with the Tribunal
11.39 Parents and young people have two months to register an SEN appeal with the
Tribunal, from the date when the local authority sent the notice containing a
decision which can be appealed or one month from the date of a certificate which
has been issued following mediation or the parent or young person being given
mediation information, whichever is the later. In some cases parents and young
people will not register the appeal within the two-month limit. Where it is fair and
just to do so the Tribunal has the power to use its discretion to accept appeals
outside the two-month time limit.
11.40 The Tribunal will not take account of the fact that mediation has taken place, or
has not been taken up, nor will it take into account the outcome of any mediation.
Parents and young people will not be disadvantaged at the Tribunal because they
have chosen not to go to mediation.
Parents’ and young people’s right to appeal to the
Tribunal about EHC needs assessments and EHC plans
The First-tier Tribunal (SEN and Disability)
11.41 The Tribunal forms part of the First-tier Tribunal (Health, Education and Social
Care Chamber). Tribunals are overseen by Her Majesty’s Courts and Tribunals
Service.
258

===== PAGE 259 =====
The role and function of the Tribunal
11.42 The Tribunal hears appeals against decisions made by the local authorities in
England in relation to children's and young people’s EHC needs assessments and
EHC plans. It also hears disability discrimination claims against schools and
against local authorities when the local authority is the responsible body for a
school.
11.43 The Tribunal seeks to ensure that the process of appealing is as user friendly as
possible, and to avoid hearings that are overly legalistic or technical. It is the
Tribunal’s aim to ensure that a parent or young person should not need to engage
legal representation when appealing a decision. Parents and young people may
find it helpful to have support from a voluntary organisation or friend at a hearing.
Who can appeal to the Tribunal about EHC needs assessments
and plans
11.44 Parents (in relation to children from 0 to the end of compulsory schooling) and
young people (over compulsory school age until they reach age 25) can appeal to
the Tribunal about EHC needs assessments and EHC plans, following contact
with a mediation adviser in most cases (see paragraph 11.18). Young people can
register an appeal in their name but can also have their parents’ help and support
if needed. Chapter 8, paragraphs 8.15 to 8.18 , gives further guidance on the
rights of young people under the Children and Families Act 2014 and the
involvement and support of parents.
What parents and young people can appeal about
11.45 Parents and young people can appeal to the Tribunal about:
• a decision by a local authority not to carry out an EHC needs
assessment or re-assessment
• a decision by a local authority that it is not necessary to issue an EHC
plan following an assessment
• the description of a child or young person’s SEN specified in an EHC
plan, the special educational provision specified, the school or other
institution or type of school or other institution (such as a mainstream
school/college) specified in the plan or that no school or other institution
is specified
• an amendment to these elements of the EHC plan
259

===== PAGE 260 =====
• a decision by a local authority not to amend an EHC plan following a
review or re-assessment
• a decision by a local authority to cease to maintain an EHC plan
The Tribunal does not hear appeals about Personal Budgets, but will hear appeals
about the special educational provision to which a Personal Budget may apply
(see paragraph 9.108).
11.46 Parents and young people who are unhappy with decisions about the health and
social care elements of an EHC plan can go to mediation (see paragraphs 11.31
to 11.35). They can also complain through the health and social care complaints
procedures, set out in paragraphs 11.101 to 11.104 and 11.105 to 11.111.
Conditions related to appeals
11.47 The following conditions apply to appeals:
• the parent or young person can appeal to the Tribunal when the EHC
plan is initially finalised, following an amendment or a replacement of the
plan
• appeals must be registered with the Tribunal within two months of the
local authority sending a notice to the parent or young person of the
decision about one of the matters that can be appealed to the Tribunal or
within one month of a certificate being issued following mediation or the
parent or young person being given mediation information
• the right to appeal a refusal of an EHC needs assessment will be
triggered only where the local authority has not carried out an
assessment in the previous six months
• when the parent or young person is appealing about a decision to cease
to maintain the EHC plan the local authority has to maintain the plan until
the Tribunal’s decision is made
Decisions the Tribunal can make
11.48 The Tribunal has prescribed powers under the Children and Families Act 2014 to
make certain decisions in relation to appeals. The Tribunal can dismiss the
appeal, order the local authority to carry out an assessment, or to make and
maintain an EHC plan, or to maintain a plan with amendments. The Tribunal can
also order the local authority to reconsider or correct a weakness in the plan, for
example, where necessary information is missing. Local authorities have time
260

===== PAGE 261 =====
limits within which to comply with decisions of the Tribunal (see the Special
Educational Needs Regulations 2014).
11.49 In making decisions about whether the special educational provision specified in
the EHC plan is appropriate, the Tribunal should take into account the education
and training outcomes specified in Section E of the EHC plan and whether the
special educational provision will enable the child or young person to make
progress towards their education and training outcomes. The Tribunal can
consider whether the education and training outcomes specified are sufficiently
ambitious for the child or young person. When the Tribunal orders the local
authority to reconsider the special educational provision in an EHC plan, the local
authority should also review whether the outcomes remain appropriate.
How parents and young people can appeal
11.50 When appealing to the Tribunal parents and young people must supply a copy of
the decision that they are appealing against and the date when the local
authority’s decision was made, or the date of the mediation certificate. The parent
or young person who is appealing (the appellant) will be required to give the
reasons why they are appealing. The reasons do not have to be lengthy or written
in legal language but should explain why the appellant disagrees with the
decision. Parents and young people have to send all relevant documents, such as
copies of assessments, to the Tribunal.
11.51 Once the appeal is registered the local authority will be sent a copy of the papers
filed and will be given a date by which they must respond and asked to provide
details of witnesses – this will apply to all parties. The parties will also be told of
the approximate hearing date. Hearings are heard throughout the country at Her
Majesty's Courts and Tribunals Service buildings. The Tribunal will try to hold
hearings as close to where the appellant lives as possible. Appeals are heard by a
judge and a panel of Tribunal members who have been appointed because of
their knowledge and experience of children and young people with SEN or
disabilities. The local authority will provide a bundle of papers for each of the
panel members and the parent, including any document requested by the parent.
Advice on making SEN appeals to the Tribunal is available from the Ministry of
Justice website – a link is given in the References section under General.
261

===== PAGE 262 =====
11.52 A video is available from the Ministry of Justice website which gives appellants
some guidance on what happens at a hearing – a link to it is given in the
References section under Chapter 11. A DVD of this video can be requested from
the Tribunal by writing to:
First-tier Tribunal (Special Educational Needs and Disability)
Darlington Magistrates Court
Parkgate
Darlington
DL1 1RU
Disability discrimination claims
11.53 The parents of disabled children and disabled young people in school have the
right to make disability discrimination claims to the Tribunal if they believe that
their children or the young people themselves have been discriminated against by
schools or local authorities when they are the responsible body for a school.
Claims must be made within six months of the alleged instance of discrimination.
The parents of disabled children, on behalf of their children, and disabled young
people in school can make a claim against any school about alleged
discrimination in the matters of exclusions, the provision of education and
associated services and the making of reasonable adjustments, including the
provision of auxiliary aids and services. They can also make claims to the Tribunal
about admissions to independent and non-maintained special schools. Claims
about admissions to state-funded schools are made to local admissions panels.
11.54 Disability discrimination claims by young people against post-16 institutions, and
by parents about early years provision and about their treatment as a parent in
being provided with an education service for their child, are made to the county
courts. Claims by parents and young people against local authorities about the
policies the authorities have adopted also go to the county courts.
11.55 Guidance on how to make a disability discrimination claim to the Tribunal is
available from the Ministry of Justice website, via the link to information about the
Tribunal given in the References section under General.
Exclusion
11.56 The Government issues statutory guidance on school exclusion, which can be
found on the GOV.UK website – a link is given in the References section under
Chapter 11.
11.57 The guidance sets out details of the permanent exclusion review panel process,
including parents’ right to ask for an SEN expert to attend. In addition, claims for
262

===== PAGE 263 =====
disability discrimination in relation to permanent and fixed-period exclusions may
be made to the Tribunal.
11.58 Local authorities have a duty to arrange suitable, full-time education for pupils of
compulsory school age who would not otherwise receive such education, including
from the sixth day of a permanent exclusion. Schools have a duty to arrange
suitable, full-time education from the sixth day of a fixed period exclusion (see
Chapter 10, paragraphs 10.47 to 10.52 on alternative provision). Suitable
education means efficient education suitable to a child’s age, ability and aptitude
and to any SEN the child may have.
Please note that the following figure shows the maximum time it would take to
register an appeal at the Tribunal both with and without mediation and have the
appeal heard. Most registrations of an appeal, even where the case goes to
mediation will take a far shorter time than this. The top half the diagram is for
appeals after receipt of a finalised EHC plan.
If young person or
parent wishes to
Scenario 1: Tribunal appeal with mediation register an appeal
following mediation
this is dependent on
2 m onths available for parent/YP to
the discretion of the
co ntact the LA and say whether they want LA-arranged
Tribunal to accept
to go to mediation about EHC plan. If mediation session
appeals outside of
co nsidering an appeal on SEN element of (must be arranged
the two month time
pla n have to contact mediation adviser. within 30 calendar
limit/or within 1
days) 4
month of a
Notice of When mediation is
3 certificate. If
decision complete a
accepted the appeal
received Decision made to certificate to confirm
process would then
from LA . proceed with conclusion must
be the same as in
1 mediation. come from 5
Scenario 2.
Mediation adviser mediation adviser
contacts LA within 3 working
2
1 days.
1 month 2 months 3 months 4 months
Appeal
Appeals take 20 weeks to be heard once
2 months available to contact registered
1 6/2 Copy of 7/3
mediation adviser, decide not
Notice of Tribunal
to go to mediation and register
decision decisions
an appeal, with certificate
receive d and
issued within 3 working days
from LA . reasons by
post
Scenario 2: Tribunal appeal without mediation (should be
sent within
Timescales following the hearing 10 working
days).
263

===== PAGE 264 =====
11.59 The young person or parent making the appeal and the local authority should both
receive a copy of the Tribunal's decision and reasons by post within 10 working
days of the hearing. Along with the decision notice the Tribunal will send a leaflet
which will explain the application process for permission to appeal the Tribunal
decision to the Upper Tribunal, if the appellant considers that the decision made
was wrong in law. Local authorities can also appeal to the Upper Tribunal on the
same grounds.
11.60 Step-by-step guidance on the process of appealing to the Tribunal and what it
involves can be found at the Ministry of Justice website – a link is given in the
References section under General.
Legal aid
11.61 If a parent or young person has decided to appeal, legal aid may be available to
assist with that appeal. Legal aid can fund legal advice and assistance in
preparing an appeal to the Tribunal, but not representation at the Tribunal.
11.62 Before someone can be granted legal aid they must pass a financial means
assessment. The case must also satisfy a merits test of whether it has a
reasonable chance of succeeding.
11.63 If the parent or young person’s appeal to the Tribunal is unsuccessful, and they
wish to mount a further appeal to the Upper Tribunal (or beyond to the Court of
Appeal or Supreme Court), then legal aid can provide advice, assistance and
representation, subject to the means and merits tests being met.
11.64 Legal aid for disability discrimination cases may also be available on the same
basis set out above.
11.65 A parent or young person seeking access to legal aid for an SEN case or disability
discrimination case should go to the legal aid checker on the GOV.UK website to
find out if they are eligible or contact the Civil Legal Advice (CLA) service on 0845
345 4 345. A link to the checker is given in the References section under Chapter
11. If a person is eligible, the CLA will provide legal advice, normally by phone,
online or by post unless the specialist advice provider assesses them as
unsuitable to receive advice in this way. Decisions are taken by the Director of
Legal Aid Casework on a case-by-case basis. As a civil servant, the Director acts
independently of the Lord Chancellor.
264

===== PAGE 265 =====
11.66 The following groups do not have to apply via CLA – they can seek advice directly
from a face- to-face provider:
• young people under 18, and
• those assessed by the CLA in the previous 12 months as requiring face-
to-face advice, who have a further linked problem, and are seeking
further help from the same face-to-face provider
Complaints procedures
Early education providers’ and schools’ complaints procedures
11.67 The Early Years Foundation Stage (EYFS) Statutory Framework requires all
registered childcare providers to have a complaints procedure.
11.68 For childcare provision registered with Ofsted concerns should be raised directly
with the manager or provider in the first instance. For complaints in writing the
nursery provider must respond within 28 days. Where the childcare provision is
run by a school, the school's complaints procedure should be used.
11.69 All state-funded schools are required to have a procedure to deal with complaints
and to publish details of their procedure. The governing bodies of maintained
schools should make efforts to ensure that anyone who wishes to make a
complaint, including a complaint in relation to children and young people with
SEN, whether they have EHC plans or not, is treated fairly, given the chance to
state their case, provided with a written response (including the rationale for any
decisions) and informed of their appeal rights. If the complainant remains
concerned after following the local complaints procedure, he or she could ask the
Department for Education’s School Complaints Unit to take up the matter.
11.70 Further details on making complaints to the Department about schools are
available from the GOV.UK website – a link is given in the References section
under Chapter 11.
11.71 The proprietors of academies, free schools and independent schools must, under
the Education (Independent School Standards) Regulations 2010,ensure that a
complaints procedure is drawn up which is in writing and is made available to
parents. The procedure must allow for a complaint to be considered informally in
the first instance and then, if the parent remains dissatisfied, there should be a
formal procedure for the complaint to be made in writing. If the parent is still
dissatisfied the complaint can then be heard in front of a panel of at least three
people one of whom must be independent of the management and running of the
school. Should the parent still not be satisfied they can complain, in the case of
academies and free schools, to the Education Funding Agency (EFA) acting on
265

===== PAGE 266 =====
behalf of the Secretary of State, or, in the case of independent schools, to the
Secretary of State directly. Both the EFA and the Secretary of State will look at
whether the school handled the complaint properly, rather than the substance of
the complaint. Further details on making a complaint to the EFA about academies
and free schools are also available at the website address given in the previous
paragraph.
11.72 Early years and schools complaints procedures are available for use in relation to
children and young people who have SEN but without EHC plans.
Complaints to the Secretary of State
11.73 If disagreements have not been resolved at the local level, under sections 496 and
497 of the Education Act 1996 complaints can be made to the Secretary of State
for Education that either the governing body of a maintained school or a local
authority has acted unreasonably or has failed to carry out one of its duties under
the Education Acts, including their SEN duties. The Secretary of State can also
consider complaints about disability discrimination in relation to a pupil at a school
by virtue of Section 87 of the Equality Act 2010. Sections 496 and 497 of the
Education Act 1996 apply only to maintained schools, not other state-funded
schools or independent schools.
11.74 Unreasonableness has been defined by the Courts as acting in a way in which no
reasonable governing body or local authority would have acted in the
circumstances.
11.75 The Secretary of State can issue directions about the exercise of a power or the
performance of a duty by the governing body of a maintained school or a local
authority. Any directions the Secretary of State issues must be ‘expedient’ – that
is, the direction can make a material difference in remedying the matter. The
Secretary of State would not intervene in a case where there is another avenue of
redress, such as the Tribunal.
Complaints to Ofsted
11.76 Ofsted can consider complaints from parents and others about early years
providers and schools, but only where the complaint is about the early years
provision or the school as a whole rather than in relation to individual children, and
where the parent or other complainant has tried to resolve the complaint through
the early years provider’s or school’s own complaints procedure.
11.77 Further information about complaints to Ofsted about early years or childcare
provision can be found at Ofsted’s website – a link is given in the References
section under Chapter 11.
266

===== PAGE 267 =====
11.78 Further details about school complaints can be found at Ofsted’s website – a link
is given in the References section under Chapter 11.
11.79 Examples of circumstances where complaints might relate to the school as a
whole include:
• the school not providing a good enough education
• the pupils not achieving as much as they should, or their different needs
not being met
• the school not being well led and managed, or wasting money
• the pupils’ personal development and wellbeing being neglected
11.80 Ofsted can respond to a complaint that relates to the whole school by bringing
forward an inspection, or it could decide to look at the matters raised when next
inspecting the school.
11.81 Complainants can contact Ofsted on 08456 404045 or by email
enquiries@ofsted.gov.uk
11.82 Complainants can make a formal complaint by writing to:
Enquiries
National Business Unit
Ofsted
Piccadilly Gate
Store Street
Manchester M1 2WD
Post-16 institution complaints
11.83 Complaints at general further education colleges can be made informally to the
teacher or the Principal, or through the college’s formal complaints procedure. If
the complainant is dissatisfied after going through the college’s own procedure
they can take this up with the Skills Funding Agency. A copy of the Skills Funding
Agency’s procedure for handling complaints made against colleges is available on
their website – a link is given in the References section under Chapter 11.
11.84 Complaints at sixth form colleges and some other Education Funding Agency
(EFA)-funded providers can be made informally to the teacher or the Principal, or
through the college’s formal complaints process. If the complainant is dissatisfied
after going through the provider’s own procedure they can take this up with the
EFA. A copy of the EFA’s procedure for handling complaints is available on the
GOV.UK website – a link is given in the References section under Chapter 11.
267

===== PAGE 268 =====
Local Authority complaints procedures
11.85 Some, but not all, local authorities offer a service that investigates the way in
which a complaint was handled by a local authority maintained school. This may
form part of a school’s complaints procedure.
11.86 All local authorities have responsibility to consider complaints about decisions
made in relation to the following:
• admission to schools (except in Voluntary Aided Schools)
• EHC needs assessments
• exclusion of pupils from schools
• child protection/allegations of child abuse
• complaints about the action of the Governing Body, and
• school transport
11.87 The Local Offer will make clear whether a particular local authority offers this
service.
11.88 The Local Government Ombudsman provides ‘top tips’ for making a complaint to a
local authority on its website – a link is provided in the References section under
Chapter 11.
Local Government Ombudsman
11.89 The Local Government Ombudsman (LGO) can investigate complaints against
local authorities where the complaint has not been resolved by the local authority’s
complaints procedure. The LGO investigates the process by which local authority
decisions were made and whether there has been maladministration, rather than
examining the merits of a decision which has been properly taken. The LGO will
decide whether there has been an injustice to the complainant and/or there is
evidence of maladministration. Maladministration can include delay, failure to take
action and failure to follow procedures. The LGO does not investigate the merits of
decisions which have been properly taken, but which the complainant thinks are
wrong, but does look at the decision-making process and the delivery of provision
set out in EHC plans.
11.90 The LGO does not investigate matters which can be appealed to the Tribunal,
such as a decision not to carry out an assessment (see paragraph 11.45). The
LGO can investigate complaints that the special educational provision set out in
EHC plans is not being delivered and, in doing so, can investigate what part the
268

===== PAGE 269 =====
school may have played in the provision not being delivered. (The LGO cannot,
otherwise, investigate complaints about schools’ SEN provision and has no
powers to make recommendations to a school.) In association with the
Parliamentary and Health Service Ombudsman (PHSO), the LGO can also
investigate complaints about the delivery of health provision set out in plans. As
set out in the previous paragraph, the LGO, in association with the PHSO with
regard to health, does not investigate the merits of a decision which has been
properly taken, but does look at the decision-making process and the delivery of
provision set out in EHC plans.
11.91 Complaints can be made to the Local Government Ombudsman via its website – a
link is given in the References section under Chapter 11. Help in making
complaints is available on this number: 0300 061 0614.
11.92 Alternatively, complaints can be made in writing to the following address:
PO Box 4771
Coventry
CV4 0EH
11.93 If the LGO finds evidence of fault in the way a decision has been made, it will
generally ask the local authority to reconsider the decision and consider if other
remedies are available. Where there is evidence of systemic failings, LGO
recommendations could include review of systems, policy and procedures. In
addition, if during the course of an investigation the LGO identifies other children
who are similarly affected they can widen the scope of their investigation to
include them.
11.94 The LGO cannot make local authorities carry out its recommendations following
investigation of a complaint but in practice authorities almost always do so.
The Parliamentary and Health Service Ombudsman
11.95 The role of the Parliamentary and Health Service Ombudsman (PHSO) is to
investigate complaints that individuals have been treated unfairly or have received
a poor service from government departments and other public organisations in the
UK, and the NHS in England.
11.96 The PHSO can investigate complaints about the commissioning and provision of
healthcare. As mentioned in paragraph 11.90, the PHSO can conduct joint
investigations with the LGO where a complaint includes concerns about the
delivery of the health provision in EHC plans. They will normally investigate a
complaint only once the NHS organisation has had a chance to resolve the issue
first.
269

===== PAGE 270 =====
11.97 The PHSO can also investigate a number of other organisations which have to
have regard to this Code: Ofsted, the Education Funding Agency, the Skills
Funding Agency, and the Department for Education (including its School
Complaints Unit and the Secretary of State for Education). The PHSO will
generally expect the individual to have completed the organisation’s own
complaints procedure first. Complaints about government departments and public
organisations must be referred by an MP. If someone has any difficulties getting
in touch with an MP, they can contact the PHSO for help.
11.98 The PHSO can investigate complaints that the Tribunal’s administrative staff have
got something wrong or acted in an unreasonable manner, although they cannot
look into the actions of Tribunal members or the decisions made by the Tribunal.
PHSO would generally expect the complaint to have been made to Her Majesty’s
Courts and Tribunals Service first. These complaints will also need to be referred
by an MP.
11.99 More information on the role of the PHSO is available from their website – a link is
given in the References section under Chapter 11.
Judicial review
11.100 Parents and young people can make an application to the Administrative Court for
Judicial Review. The Administrative Court can consider decisions of local
authorities in the exercise of their duties including decisions on special education
for children and young people. For example, a judicial review in relation to EHC
plans would be a review of the way in which decisions that are reflected in the
plan were made rather than the content of these decisions. An application for
judicial review will be considered only once all other options for remedy have been
exhausted. Any application for judicial review is time bound. Guidance on making
an application for Judicial Review is available from the Ministry of Justice website
– a link is given in the References section under Chapter 11.
NHS Complaints
11.101 The NHS complaints arrangements cover the health services which a child or
young person receives under an EHC plan. A complaint may be made to a service
provider (for example, the NHS Hospital Trust), where there are concerns about
the service provided, or to the CCG, where there is a concern about the way in
which a service is commissioned or provided, and this might include concerns
about the appropriateness of the services in an EHC plan.
11.102 Local Healthwatch has a statutory role to provide patients with advice on how to
take forward a complaint, or resolve an issue (local Healthwatch may also notify
Healthwatch England of concerns which need to be considered at a national
270

===== PAGE 271 =====
level). Contact details for local Healthwatch are available on the Healthwatch for
England website and should also be available with the Local Offer – a link to the
Healthwatch for England website is provided in the References section under
Chapter 11.
11.103 Each CCG will have available information about its complaints arrangements and
will deal with complaints about any of its functions (providers of NHS services will
have patient advice and liaison services, and handle complaints about the
services they provide). Just as the arrangements for commissioning services for
SEN integrate the contributions of education, health and care, so the local
authority and CCG should consider integrating their arrangements for providing
patient advice, liaison and complaints handling in this area. Support in making a
complaint about health services can also be provided by NHS Complaints
Advocacy Services (each local authority will have details of services in their own
local areas).
11.104 If a complainant is dissatisfied with the way in which the NHS has dealt with their
complaint, they can contact the PHSO, though usually the NHS will need to have
had a chance to resolve it locally. In line with the Ombudsman’s Principles of
Good Administration, in considering a complaint in relation to health services in an
EHC plan, the Ombudsman will take into account this Code of Practice, and
relevant legislation.
Complaints about social services provision
11.105 The Children Act 1989 places a duty on children’s social care services to
safeguard and protect children. Someone who is unhappy with the way in which
they or their family have been treated by these services, including during EHC
needs assessments and the drawing up of plans, has the right to make a formal
complaint under the ‘Local Authority Complaints Procedure’. They can write to
either the Director of Children’s Services or the Designated Complaints Officer for
the local authority concerned. The authority must then consider the complaint,
appointing at least one person independent of the local authority to take part in
dealing with the issues raised and provide the complainant with a written response
within 28 days.
11.106 If the complainant is unhappy with the authority's response, they can request a
panel hearing by writing to the authority within 28 days of the response. The panel
should be chaired by an independent person. If the complainant remains
dissatisfied with the handling of their complaint under the local procedures and
they think a local authority has treated them unfairly as a result of bad or inefficient
management (‘maladministration’), and that this has caused them injustice (such
as loss, injury or upset), they can refer their complaint to the Local Government
271

===== PAGE 272 =====
Ombudsman (LGO). See Local Government Ombudsman, paragraphs 11.89 to
11.94.
11.107 Young people aged 18 and over can complain under regulations which prescribe:
• a procedure before investigation, and
• an investigation and response process
11.108 The provider must acknowledge the complaint within three days and they must
offer the complainant the opportunity to discuss the timing and procedure for
resolving the complaint. Once that has been agreed, the complaint must be
investigated and, as soon as possible after completing the investigation, a written
report must be sent to the complainant explaining how the complaint has been
considered, the conclusions of the report and any remedial action which has been
taken or is proposed to be taken.
11.109 A complainant who is dissatisfied with the outcome of this process can also take
their case to the Local Government Ombudsman.
11.110 Parents and young people who wish to complain about the way in which their
concerns about the social care elements of EHC plans have been dealt with can
use these complaint procedures whether they go to mediation about the social
care elements of the plan or not.
11.111 From 2016 there will also be a new system for appealing local authority decisions
made under part 1 of the Care Act. This will be detailed in future updates to
Statutory Guidance on the Care Act 2014.
272

===== PAGE 273 =====
Annex 1: Mental Capacity
Young people over compulsory school age have the right to participate in
decisions about the provision that is made for them and be consulted about
provision in their areas, although there is nothing to stop them asking their
parents, or others to help them make the decision. However, some young people,
and possibly some parents, will not have the mental capacity to make certain
decisions. Provision is made in the Children and Families Act to deal with this.
Under the Act, lacking mental capacity has the same meaning as in the Mental
Capacity Act (MCA) 2005. A separate Code of Practice provides guidance on how
the MCA works on a day-to-day basis. Professionals and anyone who is paid for
the work they do with someone who lacks capacity has a duty to ‘have regard’ to
that Code. The Code is available from the Ministry of Justice website – a link is
given in the References section under Annex 1.
In cases where a person lacks mental capacity to make a particular decision, that
decision will be taken by a representative on their behalf. The representative will
be a deputy appointed by the Court of Protection, or a person who has a lasting or
enduring power of attorney for the person. In the case of a young person who
does not have such a representative, the decision will be taken by the young
person’s parent. It is also likely that where a young person does have a
representative, that representative will be the young person’s parent. Therefore in
most cases, where a young person lacks capacity, decisions will be taken on their
behalf by their parent. However, it is important that people are helped to make
decisions themselves wherever possible.
The MCA sets out five key principles which must underlie everything someone
does in relation to someone who may lack capacity to make some decisions. The
five key principles are:
• It should be assumed that everyone can make their own decisions
unless it is proved otherwise
• A person should have all the help and support possible to make and
communicate their own decision before anyone concludes that they lack
capacity to make their own decision
• A person should not be treated as lacking capacity just because they
make an unwise decision
• Actions or decisions carried out on behalf of someone who lacks
capacity must be in their best interests
• Actions or decisions carried out on behalf of someone who lacks
capacity should limit their rights and freedom of action as little as
possible
273

===== PAGE 274 =====
If there is doubt about a person’s mental capacity, consideration needs to be given
as to whether the person lacks capacity to make that particular decision, as they
may have capacity to make some decisions but not others. This does not
necessarily mean that a person’s mental capacity has to be reassessed each time
a decision needs to be taken. If there is a reasonable belief that the person lacks
the capacity to make a decision based on prior knowledge of that person then the
decision can be made by a parent or representative, as appropriate. Subject to
the principles above, there are four key questions to consider in determining
whether someone is able to make a decision:
• Can the person understand information relevant to the decision,
including understanding the likely consequences of making, or not
making the decision?
• Can they retain this information for long enough to make the decision?
• Can they use and weigh the information to arrive at a choice?
• Can they communicate their decision in any way?
If the answer to any of these questions is ‘no’ (bearing in mind that if an
individual needs a lot of support to make and communicate a decision it
does not mean they are incapable of making a decision) then the person lacks
capacity to make that decision at that time.
The Special Educational Needs and Disability Regulations 2014 specify the
particular occasions when a representative or parent has to act on behalf of a
young person who lacks capacity or a representative if the child or young person’s
parent lacks capacity.
There are some occasions when a local authority must take account of the views
of the young person as well as any representative. These are when the local
authority is:
• having regard to the views and wishes of a child, the child’s parent or a
young person when carrying out its functions under Part III of the Act
(Section 19)
• consulting children, their parents and young people when carrying out its
duty to keep education and care provision for disabled children and
young people and those with SEN under review (Section 27)
• publishing the comments of children, their parents and young people
about its Local Offer and involving these people in preparing and
reviewing the Local Offer (Section 30), and
274

===== PAGE 275 =====
• arranging for information and advice to be provided to children, their
parents and young people and taking steps to make information and
advice services known to those people (Section 32)
The Regulations also specify the following occasions when the local authority
considers the views of the representative instead of the parent or young person.
These are where the child’s parent or young person is:
• expressing their wishes, being notified, consulted and copied documents,
agreeing or taking decisions in relation to needs assessments,
re-assessments and EHC plans (Sections 33, 36, 38, 39, 40, 42 and 44)
• being admitted to special provision where they do not have an EHC plan
(Section 34)
• requesting a Personal Budget (Section 49)
• appealing to the Tribunal (Section 51)
• participating in mediation and resolving disagreements (Sections 52, 53,
54, 55, 56 and 57)
• being consulted about making special educational provision otherwise
than in a school or post-16 institution (Section 61)
• being informed that special educational provision is being made for them
or their child (Section 68)
• similar provisions in relation to detained persons
Further advice about the MCA is available from the Ministry of Justice website – a
link is given in the References section under Annex 1.
275

===== PAGE 276 =====
Annex 2: Improving practice and staff training in
education settings
Early years providers, schools and colleges are responsible for deciding what
external support to seek and for setting their own priorities for the continuous
professional development of their staff. The support described in this guidance
can be delivered most effectively in education settings which adopt structured
approaches to engaging parents and children, tracking and measuring progress of
pupils with SEN, and where there is a good level of knowledge across all staff of
different types of SEN and suitable teaching approaches and interventions. Where
a setting has a SENCO, they should play an important role in advising on and
contributing to the broader support provided by schools and the professional
development of other teachers and staff.
A range of organisations offer support and training to schools on overall
identification and teaching approaches for pupils with SEN as well as on specific
conditions.
Many aspects of the approach set out in Chapter 6 draw on learning from the
piloting and subsequent work of Achievement for All (www.afa3as.org.uk). This
demonstrates that when a whole-school approach to supporting pupils with SEN is
taken, along with effective engagement with parents, there can be a clear impact
on attainment.
Schools, colleges and early years providers who need to improve the knowledge
and skills of staff in relation to specific conditions can access information, advice
and training materials that have been developed through the Department for
Education’s voluntary and community sector grants programme. NASEN provides
a SEN Gateway that enables access to a broad range of materials and support
services across the range of SEN (www.sendgateway.org.uk).
The Excellence gateway provides access to resources to support professional
development in the FE and Skills sector (www.excellencegateway.org.uk).
Early Support provides a range of information materials to families and
professionals www.ncb.org.uk/earlysupport.
The following organisations provide advice, information and training on specific
impairments:
• The Autism Education Trust for children and young people on the Autism
Spectrum (www.autismeducationtrust.org.uk)
• The Communications Trust for speech, language and communication
difficulties (www.thecommunicationtrust.org.uk)
276

===== PAGE 277 =====
• The Dyslexia SpLD Trust on dyslexia and literacy difficulties
(www.thedyslexia-spldtrust.org.uk)
• The National Sensory Impairment Partnership for vision impairment,
hearing impairment and multi-sensory impairment (www.natsip.org.uk)
Each of these organisations is working with funding from the Department for
Education to support the reforms to the SEN system.
MindEd (www.minded.org.uk) is an e-learning portal aimed at supporting all
adults working with children and young people. It provides simple, clear guidance
on children and young people's mental health, wellbeing and development.
277

===== PAGE 278 =====
Glossary of terms
Academy: A state-funded school in England that is directly funded by the
Department for Education, through the Education Funding Agency. Academies are
self-governing and independent of local authority control.
Access to Work: An Access to Work grant from the Department for Work and
Pensions helps to pay for practical support for young people and adults who have
a disability, health or mental health condition so they can start work, stay in work
or start their own business. It can pay for things like special equipment, fares to
work if public transport is not practical, a support worker or coach in the workplace
or a communicator at a job interview.
Annual review: the review of an EHC plan which the local authority must make as
a minimum every 12 months.
Armed Forces Covenant: The armed forces covenant sets out the relationship
between the nation, the government and the armed forces. It recognises that the
whole nation has a moral obligation to members of the armed forces and their
families and it establishes how they should expect to be treated. The Covenant
states that the children of service personnel should have the same standard of,
and access to, education (including early years services) as any other UK citizen
in the area in which they live.
Care Plan: A record of the health and/or social care services that are being
provided to a child or young person to help them manage a disability or health
condition. The Plan will be agreed with the child’s parent or the young person and
may be contained within a patient’s medical record or maintained as a separate
document. Care Plans are also maintained by local authorities for looked after
children – in this instance the Care Plan will contain a Personal Education Plan in
addition to the health and social care elements.
Child and Adolescent Mental Health Services (CAMHS): These services
assess and treat children and young people with emotional, behavioural or mental
health difficulties. They range from basic pastoral care, such as identifying mental
health problems, to specialist ‘Tier 4’ CAMHS, which provide in-patient care for
those who are severely mentally ill.
Children and young people’s secure estate: This comprises three types of
establishment – secure children’s homes, secure training centres and young
offender institutions.
Comprehensive Health Assessment Tool (CHAT): An assessment tool for
young people in the youth justice system. It ensures that young people in the
secure estate and in the community receive a comprehensive assessment of their
278

===== PAGE 279 =====
physical and mental health, substance misuse and neuro-disability needs on entry
to the system.
Compulsory school age: A child is of compulsory school age from the beginning
of the term following their 5th birthday until the last Friday of June in the year in
which they become 16, provided that their 16th birthday falls before the start of the
next school year.
Disabled Students Allowance (DSA): An allowance for undergraduate or post-
graduate students who have a disability or long-term health condition, mental
health condition or specific learning difficulty such as dyslexia or dyspraxia which
affects their ability to study. It can be used to pay for things such as special
equipment, a note-taker or transport costs.
Disagreement resolution: This is a statutory service commissioned by local
authorities to provide a quick and non-adversarial way of resolving disagreements
between parents or young people and bodies responsible for providing education,
whether the child or young person has an EHC plan or not, or health and social
care in relation to EHC assessments and plans. Disagreement resolution services
can also be used in cases of disagreement between local authorities and health
commissioning bodies during EHC needs assessments, the drawing up of EHC
plans or the reviewing of those plans.
Early Help Assessment: A social care assessment of a child and his or her
family, designed to identify needs at an early stage and enable suitable
interventions to be put in place to support the family.
Early Support Programme: The Early Support Programme co-ordinates health,
education and social care support for the parents and carers of disabled children
and young people from birth to adulthood. A key worker is assigned to families
that join the Programme.
Early Years Foundation Stage (EYFS): The foundation stage begins when
children reach the age of three. Many children attend an early education setting
soon after their third birthday. The foundation stage continues until the end of the
reception year and is consistent with the National Curriculum. It prepares children
for learning in Year 1, when programmes of study for Key Stage 1 are taught.
Early years provider: A provider of early education places for children under five
years of age. This can include state-funded and private nurseries as well as child
minders.
Education Funding Agency (EFA): An arm of the Department for Education that
manages the funding for learners between the ages of 3 and 19 years and for
those with SEN or disabilities between the ages of 3 and 25. The EFA allocates
funding to 152 local authorities for maintained schools and voluntary aided
schools. It is also responsible for funding and monitoring academies, University
279

===== PAGE 280 =====
Technical Colleges, studio schools and free schools, as well as building
maintenance programmes for schools and sixth-form colleges.
Education, Health and Care plan (EHC plan): An EHC plan details the
education, health and social care support that is to be provided to a child or young
person who has SEN or a disability. It is drawn up by the local authority after an
EHC needs assessment of the child or young person has determined that an EHC
plan is necessary, and after consultation with relevant partner agencies.
Elected members: The elected members of a county council or unitary local
authority (as opposed to the salaried officials of the council or local authority).
Some elected members have a lead responsibility for specific areas of policy, for
example the Lead Member for Children’s Services.
First-tier Tribunal (Special Educational Needs and Disability): An independent
body which has jurisdiction under section 333 of the Education Act 1996 for
determining appeals by parents against local authority decisions on EHC needs
assessments and EHC plans. The Tribunal’s decision is binding on both parties to
the appeal. The Tribunal also hears claims of disability discrimination under the
Equality Act 2010.
Free school: A free school is a type of academy, which is free to attend, but is not
controlled by the local authority. Free schools receive state funding via the
Education Funding Agency. Parents, teachers, businesses or charities can submit
an application to the Department for Education to set up a free school.
Further education (FE) college: A college offering continuing education to young
people over the compulsory school age of 16. The FE sector in England includes
general further education colleges, sixth form colleges, specialist colleges and
adult education institutes.
Graduated approach: A model of action and intervention in early education
settings, schools and colleges to help children and young people who have
special educational needs. The approach recognises that there is a continuum of
special educational needs and that, where necessary, increasing specialist
expertise should be brought to bear on the difficulties that a child or young person
may be experiencing.
Health and Wellbeing Board: A Health and Wellbeing Board acts as a forum
where local commissioners across the NHS, social care and public health work
together to improve the health and wellbeing of their local population and reduce
health inequalities. The boards are intended to increase democratic input into
strategic decisions about health and wellbeing services, strengthen working
relationships between health and social care and encourage integrated
commissioning of health and social care services.
280

===== PAGE 281 =====
Healthwatch England: Healthwatch England is an independent consumer
champion, gathering and representing the views of the public about health and
social care services in England. It operates both at a national and local level and
ensures the views of the public and people who use services are taken into
account. Healthwatch England works as part of the Care Quality Commission.
Healthy Child Programme: The Healthy Child Programme covers pregnancy and
the first five years of a child’s life, focusing on a universal preventative service that
provides families with a programme of screening, immunisation, health and
development reviews, supplemented by advice around health, wellbeing and
parenting.
Independent Reviewing Officer (IRO): The appointment of an IRO is a statutory
requirement for local authorities under the Adoption and Children Act 2002. IROs
make an important contribution to the goal of significantly improving outcomes for
looked after children. Their primary focus is to quality assure the care planning
process for each child, and to ensure that his or her current wishes and feelings
are given full consideration.
Independent school: A school that is not maintained by a local authority and is
registered under section 464 of the Education Act 1996. Section 347 of the Act
sets out the conditions under which an independent school may be approved by
the Secretary of State as being suitable for the admission of children with EHC
plans.
Independent supporter: A person recruited locally by a voluntary or community
sector organisation to help families going through an EHC needs assessment and
the process of developing an EHC plan. This person is independent of the local
authority and will receive training, including legal training, to enable him or her to
provide this support.
Information, Advice and Support Services: Information, Advice and Support
Services provide advice and information to children with SEN or disabilities, their
parents, and young people with SEN or disabilities. They provide neutral and
factual support on the special educational needs system to help the children, their
parents and young people to play an active and informed role in their education
and care. Although funded by local authorities, Information, Advice and Support
Services are run either at arm’s length from the local authority or by a voluntary
organisation to ensure children, their parents and young people have confidence
in them.
Joint Strategic Needs Assessment (JSNA): Joint strategic needs assessments
(JSNAs) analyse the health needs of populations to inform and guide
commissioning of health, wellbeing and social care services within local authority
areas. The JSNA’s central role is to act as the overarching primary evidence base
for health and wellbeing boards to decide on key local health priorities.
281

===== PAGE 282 =====
Local Offer: Local authorities in England are required to set out in their Local
Offer information about provision they expect to be available across education,
health and social care for children and young people in their area who have SEN
or are disabled, including those who do not have Education, Health and Care
(EHC) plans. Local authorities must consult locally on what provision the Local
Offer should contain.
Maintained school: For the purposes of this Code, schools in England that are
maintained by a local authority – any community, foundation or voluntary school,
community special or foundation special school.
Mediation: This is a statutory service commissioned by local authorities which is
designed to help settle disagreements between parents or young people and local
authorities over EHC needs assessments and plans and which parents and young
people can use before deciding whether to appeal to the First-Tier Tribunal about
decisions on assessment or the special educational element of a plan. Mediation
can cover any one or all three elements of an EHC plan and must be offered to
the parent or young person when the final plan is issued, but they are not able to
appeal to the Tribunal about the health and social care aspects of the plan.
National curriculum: This sets out a clear, full and statutory entitlement to
learning for all pupils, determining what should be taught and setting attainment
targets for learning. It also determines how performance will be assessed and
reported.
National Offender Management Service (NOMS): NOMS is an executive
agency of the Ministry of Justice. It is responsible for the running of prison and
probation services, rehabilitation services for prisoners leaving prison, ensuring
support is available to stop people re-offending, contract managing private sector
prisons and services such as the Prisoner Escort Service and electronic tagging,
and contract managing 35 Probation Trusts.
NHS Continuing Care: NHS Continuing Care is support provided for children and
young people under 18 who need a tailored package of care because of their
disability, an accident or illness.
NHS Continuing Healthcare: NHS Continuing Healthcare is the name given to a
package of care that is arranged and funded solely by the NHS for individuals
aged 18 and over who are not in hospital but have complex ongoing healthcare
needs. It can be provided in any setting, for example in the home or in a
residential care home.
NHS England: NHS England is an independent body, at arm’s length to the
government and held to account through the NHS Mandate. Its main role is to
improve health outcomes for people in England by providing national leadership
for improving outcomes and driving up the quality of care; overseeing the
282

===== PAGE 283 =====
operation of clinical commissioning groups; allocating resources to clinical
commissioning groups, and commissioning primary care and specialist services.
NHS foundation trust: NHS foundation trusts are not-for-profit corporations that
provide NHS hospital, mental health and ambulance services. NHS foundation
trusts are not directed by the Government, but are accountable to their local
communities through their members and governors, to their commissioners
through contracts and to Parliament through their annual report and accounts.
Foundation trusts are registered with and inspected by the Care Quality
Commission.
NHS Mandate: The NHS Mandate is issued by the government to NHS England.
It sets out the government’s ambition for the National Health Service and provides
direction to NHS England. The mandate will be reviewed annually.
NHS trust: NHS trusts are public sector bodies that provide community health,
hospital, mental health and ambulance services on behalf of the NHS in England
and Wales. Each trust is headed by a board consisting of executive and non-
executive directors, and is chaired by a non-executive director.
Non-maintained special school: Schools in England approved by the Secretary
of State under section 342 of the Education Acct 1996 as special schools which
are not maintained by the state but charge fees on a non-profit-making basis. Most
non-maintained special schools are run by major charities or charitable trusts.
Ofsted: Office for Standards in Education, a non-Ministerial government
department established under the Education (Schools) Act 1992 to take
responsibility for the inspection of all schools in England. Her Majesty’s Inspectors
(HMI) form its professional arm.
Parent: Under section 576 of the Education Act 1996, the term ‘parent’ includes
any person who is not a parent of the child, but has parental responsibility (see
below) or who cares for him or her.
Parent Carer Forum: A Parent Carer Forum is a group of parents and carers of
disabled children who work with local authorities, education, health and other
providers to make sure the services they plan and deliver meet the needs of
disabled children and families.
Parental responsibility: Parental responsibility is defined under Section 3 (1) of
the Children Act 1989 as meaning all the duties, rights, powers, responsibilities
and authority which parents have with respect to their children and their children’s
property. Under Section 2 of the Children Act 1989, parental responsibility falls
upon:
• all mothers and fathers who were married to each other at the time of the
child’s birth (including those who have since separated or divorced)
283

===== PAGE 284 =====
• mothers who were not married to the father at the time of the child’s
birth, and
• fathers who were not married to the mother at the time of the child’s
birth, but who have obtained parental responsibility either by agreement
with the child’s mother or through a court order
Under Section 12 of the Children Act 1989, where a court makes a residence
order in favour of any person who is not the parent or guardian of the child, that
person has parental responsibility for the child while the residence order remains
in force.
Under section 33 (3) of the Children Act 1989, while a care order is in force with
respect to a child, the social services department designated by the order will have
parental responsibility for that child, and will have the power (subject to certain
provisions) to determine the extent to which a parent or guardian of the child may
meet his or her parental responsibility for the child. The social services department
cannot have parental responsibility for a child unless that child is the subject of a
care order, except for very limited purposes where an emergency protection order
is in force under Section 44 of the Children Act 1989.
Personal Budget: A Personal Budget is an amount of money identified by the
local authority to deliver provision set out in an EHC plan where the parent or
young person is involved in securing that provision. The funds can be held directly
by the parent or young person, or may be held and managed on their behalf by
the local authority, school, college or other organisation or individual and used to
commission the support specified in the EHC plan.
Personal Education Plan: An element of a Care Plan maintained by a local
authority in respect of a looked after child, which sets out the education needs of
the child. If a looked after child has an EHC plan, the regular reviews of the EHC
plan should, where possible, coincide with reviews of the Personal Education
Plan.
Portage: Planned, home-based educational support for pre-school children with
special educational needs. Local authorities usually provide Portage services. The
Portage service is named after the town of Portage, Wisconsin, USA. There is an
active and extensive network of Portage services in the UK, developed by the
National Portage Association, which provides a Code of Practice and accredited
training.
Pupil Referral Unit (PRU): Any school established and maintained by a local
authority under section 19 (2) of the Education Act 1996 which is specially
organised to provide education for pupils who would otherwise not receive suitable
education because of illness, exclusion or any other reason.
284

===== PAGE 285 =====
Service Children’s Education (SCE): SCE oversees the education of UK Service
children abroad. It is funded by the Ministry of Defence and operates its own
schools as well as providing advice to parents on UK and overseas schools.
Special Educational Needs (SEN): A child or young person has SEN if they have
a learning difficulty or disability which calls for special educational provision to be
made for him or her. A child of compulsory school age or a young person has a
learning difficulty or disability if he or she has a significantly greater difficulty in
learning than the majority of others of the same age, or has a disability which
prevents or hinders him or her from making use of educational facilities of a kind
generally provided for others of the same age in mainstream schools or
mainstream post-16 institutions.
Special Educational Needs Co-ordinator (SENCO): A qualified teacher in a
school or maintained nursery school who has responsibility for co-ordinating SEN
provision. In a small school, the headteacher or deputy may take on this role. In
larger schools there may be a team of SENCOs. Other early years settings in
group provision arrangements are expected to identify an individual to perform the
role of SENCO and childminders are encouraged to do so, possibly sharing the
role between them where they are registered with an agency.
Special educational provision: Special educational provision is provision that is
different from or additional to that normally available to pupils or students of the
same age, which is designed to help children and young people with SEN or
disabilities to access the National Curriculum at school or to study at college.
Special school: A school which is specifically organised to make special
educational provision for pupils with SEN. Special schools maintained by the local
authority comprise community special schools and foundation special schools, and
non-maintained (independent) special schools that are approved by the Secretary
of State under Section 342 of the Education Act 1996.
Speech and language therapy: Speech and language therapy is a health care
profession, the role and aim of which is to enable children, young people and
adults with speech, language and communication difficulties (and associated
difficulties with eating and swallowing) to reach their maximum communication
potential and achieve independence in all aspects of life.
Virtual School Head (VSH): The Virtual School Head (VSH) is an officer of a
local authority who leads a virtual school team that tracks the progress of children
looked after by the authority as if they attended a single school. The Children and
Families Act 2014 requires every local authority to appoint an officer who is an
employee of that or another authority to discharge this duty.
285

===== PAGE 286 =====
Young person: A person over compulsory school age (the end of the academic
year in which they turn 16). From this point the right to make decisions about
matters covered by the Children and Families Act 2014 applies to the young
person directly, rather than to their parents.
Youth Justice Board (YJB): The Youth Justice Board for England and Wales is
an executive non-departmental public body. Its board members are appointed by
the Secretary of State for Justice. The YJB oversees the youth justice system in
England and Wales, works to prevent offending and reoffending by children and
young people under the age of 18 and ensures that custody for them is safe,
secure and addresses the causes of their offending behaviour.
Youth Offending Team (YOT): Youth offending teams are part of local authorities
and are separate from the police and the justice system. They work with local
agencies including the police, probation officers, health, children’s services,
schools and the local community, to run local crime prevention programmes, help
young people at the police station if they’re arrested, help young people and their
families at court, supervise young people serving a community sentence and stay
in touch with a young person if they’re sentenced to custody.
286

===== PAGE 287 =====
References
General
These references are used many times across the Code and are therefore not
repeated under individual chapters:
Care Act 2014
Children and Families Act 2014
Education Act 1996
Equality Act 2010
First-tier Tribunal (Special Educational Needs and Disability)
Office for Standards in Education (Ofsted)
Pathfinder information packs
Special Educational Needs (Personal Budgets) Regulations 2014
Special Educational Needs and Disability Regulations 2014
Introduction
Children Act 1989 Guidance and Regulations Volume 2 (Care Planning,
Placement and Case Review)
Children Act 1989 Guidance and Regulations Volume 3 (Planning Transition to
Adulthood for Care Leavers)
Equality Act 2010: Advice for Schools
Mental Capacity Act Code of Practice: Protecting the Vulnerable 2007
Reasonable adjustments for disabled pupils 2012:
Supporting pupils at school with medical conditions
Transition to the new 0-25 special educational needs and disability system (DfE
guidance)
Working Together to Safeguard Children 2013
Chapter 1: Principles
Contact a Family
National Network of Parent Carer Forums
School Admissions Code of Practice
United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities
United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child
287

===== PAGE 288 =====
Chapter 2: Impartial information, advice and support
Children’s Education Advisory Service (CEAS)
Early Support Programme
Family Information Services
Information, Advice and Support Services Network – guidance on impartial
information, advice and support
Patient Advice and Liaison Service (PALS)
Chapter 3: Working together across education, health
and care for joint outcomes
Campbell Collaboration
Child and Maternal Health Intelligence Network (ChiMat)
Children Act 1989
Children Act 2004
Chronically Sick and Disabled Persons Act 1970
Cochrane Collaboration
Commissioning support resources (BOND/Young Minds):
Health and Social Care Act 2012
Improving Children and Young People’s Health Outcomes: a system-wide
response (Children and Young People’s Outcome Forum)
In Control examples of approaches to Personal Budgets
JSNA guidance
Making it personal (Kids website)
National Development Team for Inclusion (NDTI)
National Health Service Act 2006
Procurement, Patient Choice and Competition Regulations: guidance and
hypothetical case scenarios (Monitor)
Public health in local government – factsheet for local authorities
Transforming Participation in Health and Care (NHS England)
Who Pays? Determining responsibility for payments to providers (August 2013)
Winterbourne Concordat
Chapter 4: The Local Offer
Access to Work fund (DWP)
Breaks for Carers of Disabled Children Regulations 2011
School Organisation (Maintained Schools) guidance (DfE)
288

===== PAGE 289 =====
Chapter 5: Early years providers
Statutory Framework for the Early Years Foundation Stage
Early years outcomes guide
Healthy Child Programme
National Children’s Bureau
Chapter 6: Schools
Achievement for All
Autism Education Trust
Bullying guidance
Communication Trust
Data Protection Act 1998
Dyslexia SpLD Trust
I CAN – the children’s communications charity
Mental Health and Behaviour Guidance (DfE)
MindEd
National Award for SENCO Co-ordination: learning outcomes
National Sensory Impairment Partnership
Provision mapping resources
Social Care for Deafblind Children and Adults guidance 2009 (DoH)
Supporting pupils at school with medical conditions
Chapter 7: Further Education
16 to 19 funding guidance (DfE)
Disabled Students Allowance (DSA)
Education Funding Agency (EFA)
Higher Education Funding Council for England (HEFCE)
Skills Funding Agency (SFA)
Chapter 8: Preparing for adulthood from the earliest years
16 to 19 study programmes: advice for further education colleges
Access to Work (DWP)
Autism Strategy 2014
Care Act 2014 – Personal Budget Guidance (draft)
Care Act 2014 – Transition Guidance (draft)
Mental Capacity Act 2005
289

===== PAGE 290 =====
Mental Health Action Plan – Closing the Gap 2014
Ordinary Residence Guidance 2013 (DoH)
Participation of young people in education, employment and training (DfE
guidance)
Preparing for Adulthood
Supported internships – DfE advice (2014)
Chapter 9: Education, health and care needs
assessments and plans
Chronically Sick and Disabled Persons Act 1970
Community Care, services for Carers and Children’s Services (Direct Payments)
Regulations 2009
Disabled Persons (Services, Consultation and Representation) Act 1986
Education and Inspections Act 2006
Information sharing for practitioners and managers (DfE)
Local Government Act 1974
National Health Service (Direct Payments) Regulations 2013
Picture Exchange Communication System
Support and aspiration – introducing Personal Budgets
Chapter 10: Children and young people in specific
circumstances
Alternative provision guidance (DfE)
Apprenticeships, Skills and Learning Act 2009
Children and Young Persons Act 2008
Children’s Education Advisory Service (CEAS)
Comprehensive Health Assessment Tool (CHAT)
Crime and Disorder Act 1998
Designated Teacher (Looked After Pupils etc) Regulations 2009
Education (Pupil Information) Regulations 2005
Preparing for Adulthood Factsheet – ‘Links Between the Children and Families Act
2014 and the Care Act’
Preparing for Adulthood
Raising the Participation Age – useful information
Standards for the healthcare of children and young people in secure settings
(Royal College of Paediatrics and Child Health)
290

===== PAGE 291 =====
Chapter 11: Resolving disagreements
Care Act – Statutory Guidance (draft)
Children Act 1989 Representations Procedure (England) Regulations 2006:
Complaints about schools (DfE)
Complaints to local authorities (LGO tips)
Complaints to Ofsted about early years or childcare provision
Complaints to Ofsted about schools
Complaints to the EFA
Complaints to the SFA
Education (Independent School Standards) Regulations 2010:
Exclusions guidance (DfE)
Healthwatch for England
Judicial review guidance (MoJ)
Legal aid checker
Legal Aid, Sentencing and Punishment of Offenders Act 2012:
Local Authority Social Services and National Health Service Complaints (England)
Regulations 2009
Local Government Ombudsman (LGO)
Ministry of Justice – Tribunal video
Parliamentary and Health Service Ombudsman (PHSO)
Tribunal Procedure (First-tier Tribunal)(Health, Education and Social Care
Chamber) Rules 2008
Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007
Annex 1: Mental Capacity
Mental Capacity Act 2005 (MoJ)
291

===== PAGE 292 =====
© Crown copyright 2015
You may re-use this document/publication (not including logos) free of charge in
any format or medium, under the terms of the Open Government Licence v3.0.
Where we have identified any third party copyright information you will need to
obtain permission from the copyright holders concerned.
To view this licence:
visit www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence/version/3
email psi@nationalarchives.gsi.gov.uk
About this publication:
enquiries www.education.gov.uk/contactus
download www.gov.uk/government/publications
Reference: DFE-00205-2013
Follow us on Twitter: Like us on Facebook:
@educationgovuk facebook.com/educationgovuk
292